     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: The Way to Divine Knowledge
      Creator(s): Law, William (1686-1761)
          Rights: Public Domain
   CCEL Subjects: All;
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

  The Way to Divine Knowledge

      being several Dialogues between

  Humanus, Academicus, Rusticus, and Theophilus

      As preparatory to a new edition of the works

      of Jacob Behmen; and the right use of them
     __________________________________________________________________

   [Way-1-1] Humanus. Oh! Theophilus, I must yield, and it is with great
   pleasure that I now enter into conversation with you. You have taken
   from me all power of cavilling and disputing. I have no opinions that I
   choose to maintain, but have the utmost desire of entering further into
   this field of light, which you have so clearly opened to my view. I
   shall not trouble you with the relation of what has passed in my soul,
   nor what struggles I have had, with that variety of heathenish notions
   which have had their turn in my mind. It is better to tell you, that
   they are dead and buried, or rather consumed to nothing by that new
   light, which you have opened in so many great points, that I was quite
   a stranger to before. To reject all that you have said concerning the
   fall of angels, the original of this world, the creation and fall of
   man, and the necessity of a redemption, as great as that of the gospel,
   is impossible; nothing can do it, or stand out against it, but the most
   willful and blind obstinacy.

   [Way-1-2] But these great points cannot be received in any true degree,
   without seeing the vain contention of all those, who either defend or
   oppose the gospel without any true and real knowledge of them. The one
   contend for, and the other oppose, not the gospel, but a system of
   empty words, and historical facts, branched into forms and modes of
   dividing one church from another; whereas the gospel is no history of
   any absent, distant, or foreign thing, but is a manifestation of an
   essential, inherent, real life and death in every son of Adam; grounded
   on the certainty of his first angelical nature, on the certainty of his
   real fall from that into an animal earthly life of impure, bestial
   flesh and blood, and on the certainty of an inward redemption from it,
   by the divine nature given again into him. These three great points,
   with all the doctrines, duties, and consequences, that are essentially
   contained in, or flow from them, are the gospel of Jesus Christ, to
   which, by your means, I am become a convert. I am now, dear Theophilus,
   strongly drawn two different ways. First, I am all hunger and thirst
   after this new light, a glimpse of which has already raised me, as it
   were, from the dead; and I am in the utmost impatience to hear more and
   more of this divine philosophy, which, I so plainly see, opens all the
   mysteries both of nature and grace from the beginning to the end of
   time. What I have heard from you, when I was obliged to be silent, and
   what I have since found and felt by much reading the Appeal, and that
   Dialogue, obliges me to speak in this ardent manner. They have awakened
   something in me which I never felt before, something much deeper than
   my reason, and over which I have no power; it glows in my soul, like a
   fire, or hunger, which nothing can satisfy, but a further view of those
   great truths, which I this day expect from your opening to us the
   mysteries of heaven revealed to that wonderful man, Jacob Behmen.

   [Way-1-3] On the other hand, I find in myself a vehement impulse to
   turn preacher amongst my former infidel brethren; which impulse I know
   not how to resist: For being just converted myself, I seem to know, and
   feel the true place, from whence conversion is to arise in others; and
   by the reluctance which I have felt in my passage from one side to the
   other, I seem also to know the true ground on which infidelity supports
   itself. And he only is able to declare with spirit and power any
   truths, or bear a faithful testimony of the reality of them, who
   preaches nothing but what he has first seen, and felt, and found to be
   true, by a living sensibility and true experience of their reality and
   power in his own soul. All other preaching, whether from art, hearsay,
   books, or education, is, at best, but playing with words, and mere
   trifling with sacred things. Being thus divided in myself, I hope to
   have your direction.

   [Way-1-4] Theophilus. Dear Humanus, my heart embraces you with great
   joy, and I am much pleased with what you say of yourself. This hunger
   of your soul is all that I wish for; it is the fire of God, the opening
   of eternity, the beginning of your redemption, the awakener of the
   angelic life, the root of an omnipotent faith, and the true seeker of
   all that is lost. For all these things, and much more, are the blessed
   powers which will soon break forth, and show themselves to be the true
   workings of this celestial fire, that has begun to glow within you.

   [Way-1-5] Your business is now to give way to this heavenly working of
   the Spirit of God in your soul, and turn from everything either within
   you, or without you, that may hinder the farther awakening of all that
   is holy and heavenly within you. For within you is that heavenly angel
   that died in paradise, and died no other death, than that of being hid
   a while from your sight and sensibility.

   [Way-1-6] For be assured of this, as a certain truth, that corrupt,
   fallen, and earthly as human nature is, there is nevertheless in the
   soul of every man, the fire, and light, and love of God, though lodged
   in a state of hiddenness, inactivity, and death, till something or
   other, human or divine, Moses and the prophets, Christ or his apostles,
   discover its life within us.

   [Way-1-7] For the soul of every man is the breath and life of the
   triune God, and as such a partaker of the divine nature; but all this
   divinity is unfelt, because overpowered by the workings of flesh and
   blood, till such time as distress, or grace, or both, give flesh and
   blood a shock, open the long shut-up eyes, and force a man to find
   something in himself, that sense and reason, whilst at quiet were not
   aware of. Wonder not therefore at this conflict in your soul, that you
   are eager after more light, and impatient to communicate that which you
   have. For you must be thus driven; and both these desires are only two
   witnesses to this truth, that a heaven-born spirit is come to life in
   you.

   [Way-1-8] Only remember this; look well to the ground on which you
   stand, keep a watchful eye upon every working of nature, and take care
   that nothing human, earthly, private, or selfish, mix with this
   heavenly fire: that is, see that your mind be free, universal,
   impartial, without regard to here or there, this or that, but loving
   all goodness, practicing every virtue, for itself, on its own account,
   because it is so much of God; neither coveting light, nor longing to
   communicate it to others, but merely and solely for this reason, that
   the will of God may be done, and the goodness of God brought to life
   both in you and them. For there is no goodness but God's; and his
   goodness is not alive, or fruitful in you, but so far, and in such
   degree, as the good that you mean, and do, is done in and by that
   Spirit, by which God himself is good. For as there is but one that is
   good, so there is, and can be but one goodness. And therefore it is,
   that we are called not to an human, worldly, prudential, partial
   goodness, suitable to our selfish reason, and natural tempers, but to
   be perfect, as our Father in heaven is perfect. And the full reason is
   expressed in the words; for if our Father is in heaven, we must be
   there too in spirit and life, or we are not his children; if heaven is
   that for which we are made, and that which we have lost, it is not any
   human goodness, but a heavenly birth and Spirit of God's own goodness,
   working in us, as it does in God, that can make us the heavenly
   children of our Father in heaven. You must love the light of God, as
   God loves it; you must desire that others may enjoy it, as God desires
   it. Now God is a free, universal, impartial love, loving and doing
   every kind of good, for its own sake, because that is the highest and
   most perfect working of life; and because everything else but goodness,
   for its own sake, is imperfect, and a degree of evil, misery, and
   death. And no creature can come out of its imperfection, misery, and
   death, but by the pure, free, unmixed goodness of God, being born in
   it. Though you had outwardly all virtues, and seemed doing all that the
   saints of God have done, yet unless the same Spirit, by which God
   himself is good, brought forth your goodness, all would be only an
   earthly labor, that could have no communication with heaven.

   [Way-1-9] Therefore, my friend, set out right, and be assured of this
   truth, that nature, and self, and every particular view, must be
   totally renounced; or else, be your zeal what it will, ever so pleasing
   to yourself, or astonishing to the world, you are not working with God.

   [Way-1-10] Here now you have the test of truth, by which you may always
   know, whether it be the Spirit of God, and the love of God, that drives
   you. If your zeal is after this pure, free, universal goodness of God,
   then of a truth the Spirit of God breatheth in you; but if you feel not
   the love of this pure, free, universal goodness, and yet think that you
   love God, you deceive yourself; for there is no other true love of God,
   but the loving that, which God is.

   [Way-1-11] But if you please, Humanus, pray tell me, in what manner you
   would attempt to make converts to Christianity.

   [Way-1-12] Humanus. I would not take the method generally practiced by
   the modern defenders of Christianity. I would not attempt to show from
   reason and antiquity, the necessity and reasonableness of a divine
   revelation in general, or of the Mosaic and Christian in particular.
   Nor enlarge upon the arguments for the credibility of the gospel-
   history, the reasonableness of its creeds, institutions, and usages; or
   the duty of man to receive things above, but not contrary to, his
   reason. I would avoid all this, because it is wandering from the true
   point in question, and only helping the Deist to oppose the gospel with
   a show of argument, which he must necessarily want, was the gospel left
   to stand upon its own bottom.

   [Way-1-13] And, on the other hand, should the Deist yield up such a
   cause as this, and change sides, he could only be said to have changed
   his opinion about facts, without any more altering or bettering his
   state in God, than if he had only altered his opinion about things in
   dispute amongst the ancient philosophers.

   [Way-1-14] For since the fall of man, implying a real change from his
   first state, or a total death to his first created life, since the
   necessity of a new birth of that lost life, by the life of God again
   restored to, or born in the soul, are two points, quite overlooked by
   those who defend the truth and reasonableness of the Christian scheme,
   it may be truly said, that the only ground, and the whole nature of the
   gospel is quite dropped and given up by those who thus defend it.

   [Way-1-15] For the gospel has but one ground, or reason, and that is
   the fall of man, it has but one nature, and that is to help man again
   to all that he had lost.

   [Way-1-16] How unreasonable would it be, to offer the Christian
   redemption to glorious angels in heaven? Could anything be more
   inconsistent with their heavenly, unfallen state? Yet just so
   unreasonable would it be to offer it to man unfallen from his first
   created state--for man standing in that first perfection of life, which
   God breathed into him, and in that very outward state, or world, into
   which God himself brought him, wants no more redemption, than the most
   glorious angels do; and to preach to such a man, in order to be
   reconciled to God, the necessity of dying to himself, and the world he
   is in, would be as contrary to all sense and reason, as to preach to
   angels the necessity of dying to themselves, their divine life and the
   kingdom of heaven, for which God had created them.

   [Way-1-17] Thus does it appear, that the fall of man, into the life of
   this earthly world, is the sole ground of his wanting the redemption,
   which the gospel offers.

   [Way-1-18] Hence it is that the gospel has only one simple proposal of
   certain life, or certain death to man; of life, if he will take the
   means of entering into the kingdom of God, of death if he chooses to
   take up his rest in the kingdom of this world. This is the simple
   nature, and sole drift of the gospel; it means no more, than making
   known to man, that this world, and the life of it, is his fall, and
   separation from God, and happiness, both here and hereafter: and that
   to be saved or restored to God and happiness, can only be obtained, by
   renouncing all love, and adherence to the things of this world. Look at
   all the precepts, threatenings and doctrines of the gospel, they mean
   nothing, but to drive all earthly-mindedness and carnal affections out
   of the soul, to call man from the life, spirit and goods of this world,
   to a life of hope, and faith, and trust, and love and desire of a new
   birth from heaven.

   [Way-1-19] To embrace the gospel is to enter with all our hearts into
   its terms of dying to all that is earthly both within us, and without
   us; and on the other hand to place our faith, and hope, and trust, and
   satisfaction in the things of this world, is to reject the gospel with
   our whole heart, spirit and strength, as much as any infidel can do,
   notwithstanding we made ever so many verbal assents and consents to
   everything that is recorded in the New Testament.

   [Way-1-20] This therefore is the one true essential distinction between
   the Christian and the infidel. The infidel is a man of this world,
   wholly devoted to it, his hope and faith are set upon it; for where our
   heart is, there, and only there is our hope and faith. He has only such
   virtues, such goodness, and such a religion, as entirely suits with the
   interest of flesh and blood, and keeps the soul happy in the lust of
   the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life: this, and this
   alone, is infidelity, a total separation from God, and a removal of all
   faith, and hope from him, into the life of this world. It matters not,
   whether this infidel be a professor of the gospel, a disciple of
   Zoroaster, a follower of Plato, a Jew, a Turk, or an opposer of the
   gospel-history: this difference of opinions or professions alters not
   the matter, it is the love of the world instead of God, that
   constitutes the whole nature of the infidel.

   [Way-1-21] On the other hand, the Christian renounces the world, as his
   horrid prison; he dies to the will of flesh and blood, because it is
   darkness, corruption, and separation from God; he turns from all that
   is earthly, animal, and temporal, and stands in a continual tendency of
   faith, and hope, and prayer to God, to have a better nature, a better
   life and spirit born again into him from above.

   [Way-1-22] Where this faith is, there is the Christian, the new
   creature in Christ, born of the Word and Spirit of God; neither time
   nor place, nor any outward condition of birth, and life, can hinder his
   entrance into the kingdom of God.

   [Way-1-23] But where this faith is not, there is the true, complete
   infidel, the man of the earth, the unredeemed, the rejector of the
   gospel, the son of perdition, that is dead in trespasses and sins,
   without Christ, an alien from the commonwealth of Israel, a stranger
   from the covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the
   world.

   [Way-1-24] Here therefore I fix my true ground of converting men to
   Christianity; and how miserably, may I say, do they err, who place
   Christianity and infidelity in anything else, but in the heart either
   devoted to this world, or devoted to God!

   [Way-1-25] He therefore that opens a field of controversy to the Deist,
   about revelation in general, of the history of facts, creeds, and
   doctrines of churches, not only leads him from the merits of the
   gospel, but brings him into a field of battle, where he may stand his
   ground as long as he pleases. This I can truly say from my own
   experience, who have been 20 years in this dust of debate; and have
   always found that the more books there were written in this way of
   defending the gospel, the more I was furnished with new objections to
   it, and the less apprehensive of any danger from my not receiving it.

   [Way-1-26] For I had frequently a consciousness rising up within me,
   that the debate was equally vain on both sides, doing no more real good
   to the one than to the other, not being able to imagine, that a set of
   scholastic, logical opinions about history, facts, doctrines, and
   institutions of the church, or a set of logical objections against
   them, were of any significancy toward making the soul of man either an
   eternal angel of heaven, or an eternal devil of hell. And therefore it
   was, that I was often tempted rather to think, there was neither
   heaven, nor hell, than to believe that such a variety of churches, and
   systems of opinion, all condemning, and all condemned by one another,
   were to find the heaven of God opened to receive them, but he who was
   equally led by opinion to reject them all, was doomed to hell. But you,
   sir (and how can I thank you for it?) have put a full end to all this
   vain strife of opinions floating in the brain; you have dispersed the
   clouds that surrounded my bewildered mind; you have brought me home to
   myself, where I find heaven and hell, life and death, salvation and
   damnation at strife within me; you have shown me the infinite worth of
   Christianity, and the dreadful nature of infidelity, not by helping me
   to a new opinion, for my reason to maintain, but by proving to me this
   great and decisive truth, that Christianity is neither more nor less,
   than the goodness of the divine life, light and love, living and
   working in my soul; and that infidelity in its whole nature, is purely
   and solely the heart of man living in, governed by, and contented with
   the evil workings of the earthly life, spirit and nature.

   [Way-1-27] This is the infidelity that you have forced me to fly from,
   and renounce, and that is the Christianity, to which I am converted
   with all the strength of my heart and spirit. Away then with all the
   fictions and workings of reason, either for, or against Christianity!
   They are only the wanton sport of the mind, whilst ignorant of God, and
   insensible of its own nature and condition. Death and life are the only
   things in question; life is God, living and working in the soul; death
   is the soul living and working according to the sense and reason of
   bestial flesh and blood. Both this life, and this death are of their
   own growth, growing from their own seed within us, not as busy reason
   talks or directs, but as our heart turns either to the one or the
   other.

   [Way-1-28] But, dear Theophilus, I must now tell you that I want to
   make haste in this new road you have put me in. Time is short, I am
   afraid of leaving the world, before I have left all worldly tempers,
   and before the first holy and heavenly birth be quickened, and brought
   to life in me.

   [Way-1-29] An angel my first father was created, and therefore nothing
   but the angel belongs to man, and nothing but the angel can enter into
   heaven. Angelic goodness, therefore, is the one thing that man must
   look up into God for, because it is the one goodness that he has lost.
   Everything else, flesh and blood, earth and all earthly tempers,
   everything that had its rise from the fall of Adam, must be renounced,
   and given up to death, that the first angelic glory of the life of God
   in man may be again found in him.

   [Way-1-30] Theophilus. Indeed, Humanus, you have made great haste
   already; for all the haste that we can make, consists in a total dying
   to all the tempers and passions which we have received from the spirit
   of this world, by our fall into it. And the more watchfully, earnestly,
   and constantly, we do this, the more haste we make to our lost country,
   and heavenly glory.

   [Way-1-31] It is no extravagance, or overstraining the matter, when we
   say, that our goodness must be angelic; for no goodness less than that,
   can be divine and heavenly, or help us to a life in heaven. It is often
   said, that we are poor, infirm men, and not angels; and therefore must
   be content with the poverty and infirmity of human virtues. That we are
   poor, infirm men, is undeniable; but this is the one infallible reason,
   why a virtue that is according to our nature, or of its own growth, can
   do us no good. We were not created poor and infirm men by God, but have
   lost him, are separated from him; full of misery, because we have
   changed our first state, and brought all this poverty, corruption, and
   infirmity, upon ourselves. And therefore, as this infirmity is from
   ourselves, so we must intend nothing less, or short of the total
   removal of it, nor think that we have our proper goodness, till we
   stand in that degree of it, in which God created us. For, be assured of
   this great truth, that nothing in us can be the delight of God, but
   that very creature, which he created. All therefore must be parted
   with, that God hath not created and brought to life in us. And no
   goodness but that of an angel, can overcome the evil that is in us, or
   do the will of God on earth, as it is done in heaven, which is the only
   goodness in and for which God created us.

   [Way-1-32] Academicus. Pray, Theophilus, give me leave to say, that I
   should think it better, not to insist so much upon the word "angelic,"
   when you speak of the goodness, that ought to be ours. For it seems to
   me too liable to objection. We have not the high faculties, and exalted
   powers, of angels; and therefore our goodness cannot rise up to an
   equality with theirs.

   [Way-1-33] Rusticus. Pray, Academicus, give me leave also to say, that
   if your learning did not lead you to mind words, more than things, you
   could not have fallen into this critical scruple. For our call to
   angelic goodness does not suppose or require any high stretch, or
   refined elevation, of our intellectual faculties and powers. A shepherd
   watching over his flock, a poor slave digging in the mines, may each of
   them, though so employed to the end of their lives, stand before God in
   a degree of goodness truly angelic. On the other hand, you may spend
   all your time in high speculations, writing and preaching upon
   Christian perfection, composing seraphic hymns of heavenly matters,
   with a strength of thought and genius that delights both yourself and
   others, and yet, so doing to the day of your death, have only a
   goodness like that of eating and drinking that which most pleases your
   palate.

   [Way-1-34] Would you know the true nature of angelic goodness, see how
   the Spirit of Christ speaks, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all
   thy heart, soul, and strength, and thy neighbor as thyself. I came into
   the world not to do my own will, not to seek my own glory or honor, not
   to have a kingdom in this world, but to promote the kingdom of God, and
   do the will of my Father in heaven. My meat and drink is to do the will
   of him that sent me. When thou makest a feast, call not thy rich
   friends and acquaintance, but the poor, the lame, and blind. Whether
   you eat or drink, or whatever you do, do all to the glory and praise of
   God. Thus speaks the Spirit of Christ; and he that in this Spirit thus
   lives, is an angel, whether he be in heaven, or enclosed in flesh and
   blood. And all of us are in the way of attaining to this angelic
   goodness, as soon as we hate the selfish tempers of our own earthly
   life, and earnestly long, in the spirit of prayer, to have the life of
   God brought forth in us. Now this goodness we must have, or we have
   none at all; for there is but one God, one good, and one goodness; and
   it is rightly called angelic, because nothing is capable of it, but the
   heavenly angelic nature; nor can it have any existence in man, till the
   workings of our earthly nature are overcome, and brought into
   subjection to that Spirit, which is not of man, but from heaven. For
   flesh and blood in all its workings can work only for itself; darkness
   can only be dark, it has no other nature; coldness can only be cold;
   earth can only be earthly; and the works of light can only proceed from
   light. Flesh and blood, or that life which is only from the stars and
   elements of this world, can only work as the stars and elements work,
   only for time, and a corruptible life; it can only be bestial, and
   serve the end of a bestial life; it is insensible and incapable of
   divine virtue, and is, and can be of no higher a nature in a man, than
   in a beast, and must have the same end in both. It is quite incapable
   of entering into the kingdom of God; and only for this reason, because
   it is absolutely incapable of having any true and heavenly goodness. It
   has then only its proper goodness, when it has lost its power of
   acting, and is governed by a spirit superior to it; whilst it lives and
   rules, it can only live to itself; is nothing but an earthly own will,
   own love, own honor, own interest, never rising higher, doing better,
   or coming any nearer to goodness, than its own pride or covetousness,
   envy or wrath, can carry it. For these tempers, with all their lesser
   subdivisions, are the atmosphere that sets bounds to the breath of the
   earthly life; they are essential to it, and as inseparable from it, as
   hardness and darkness are inseparable from a rock of stone. So long as
   the stony rock lasts, so long is it hard and dark. And so long as
   earthly flesh and blood lives and acts, it can only live and act for
   itself; it can seek, love, like, or do no manner of thing, but as its
   own will, own love, own interest, is some way or other felt, and found
   in it. Would you know the true ground and reason of this? It is because
   no life can go out of, or farther than itself; nor can it will
   anything, but what its own life is. This is absolutely true of every
   life, whether it be divine, earthly, or hellish; it can seek, love, and
   delight in nothing, but that which is according to its own life.

   [Way-1-35] See here, Academicus, the folly of your quarrelling with the
   word "angelic," since the thing itself, angelic goodness, is absolutely
   necessary; it is the goodness of our first creation, and must be the
   goodness of our redemption. The falling from it has brought forth all
   the evils that we are surrounded with, and nothing can deliver us from
   the death of our fallen state, but a true and full resurrection of all
   that purity and goodness, which was living in the first creation of
   man. To be content with our infirmities, is to be content with our
   separation from God; and not to aspire after the one angelic goodness,
   is to be carnally-minded, which we are told is death, that is, death to
   the one divine life.

   [Way-1-36] A virtue that is only according to the state of this earthly
   life, is a virtue of art, and human contrivance, a fiction of behavior,
   modelled according to rule and custom, or education, that can go no
   deeper, nor rise higher, nor reach farther, than the sense and reason,
   and interests of flesh and blood, can carry it. But this can have no
   communication with God and heaven, because it is not born of them, but
   is a lower, separate state of life, that at best can only bring forth a
   civility of outward manners, little better than such a new birth as may
   be had from a dancing-master. But the goodness which we want, and which
   we were created to have, is the one holy blessed life of God, and
   Christ, and heaven, living in the soul. For from eternity to eternity,
   there never was, or ever can be, any other heavenly goodness in any
   creature, but the life, and Spirit, and Word of God, speaking, living,
   and breathing in it.

   [Way-1-37] Bid the anatomist, that can skillfully dissect an human
   body, that can tell you the names, nature, and offices of most of its
   parts, that can show you how they all conspire to give life, strength,
   and motion, to the living machine: bid him, I say, put life into the
   dead carcase.

   [Way-1-38] Now learned reason, when pretending to be a master of
   morality, is just as powerful as this very anatomist. It can skillfully
   dissect a dead system of morality, can separate all its parts, tell you
   the names, nature, distinctions, and connections, of most kinds of good
   and evil. But when this is done, learned reason, with all its dictates,
   distinctions, and definitions, can do just as much good to the soul,
   that has lost its goodness, as the anatomist can do to the carcase,
   that has lost its life.

   [Way-1-39] It is wonderfully astonishing, that you men of learning
   seldom come thus far, as to see, and feel this glaring truth, that
   goodness must be a living thing; but, blinded with the empty sounds of
   words in variety of languages, are as content and happy with a religion
   of nature delineated, or book of axioms, maxims, and deductions,
   mathematically placed one after another, as if you had really found the
   tree of life. Whereas, in truth, all this is no better than the reading
   a lecture upon the use of the heart, liver, and lungs, to a dead
   carcase: for the life of goodness can no more be raised, or brought
   into the soul, by this art of reasoning, than life can be brought into
   the carcase, by a discourse upon the heart, live, and lungs, made over
   it.

   [Way-1-40] Oh! Academicus, forget your scholarship, give up your art
   and criticism, be a plain man, and then the first rudiments of sense
   may teach you, that there, and there only, can goodness be, where it
   comes forth as a birth of life, and is the free natural work and fruit
   of that which lives within us. For till goodness thus comes from a life
   within us, we have in truth none at all. For reason, with all its
   doctrine, discipline, and rules, can only help us to be so good, so
   changed, and amended, as a wild beast may be, that by restraints and
   methods is taught to put on a sort of tameness, though its wild nature
   is all the time only restrained, and in a readiness to break forth
   again as occasion shall offer.

   [Way-1-41] Thus far the masters of morality and human discipline may
   go; they may tame and reform the outward man, clothe him with the
   appearance of many images of virtue, which will, some or all of them,
   be put off, just as time, occasion, and flesh and blood, require it.
   For the goodness of a living creature must be its own life; it must
   arise up in it as its own love, or any passion doth; just as the
   fierceness of the tiger, and the meekness of the lamb, are the birth of
   their own life. And if goodness is not our natural birth from our
   natural parents, we must of all necessity be born again from a
   principle above nature, or no goodness can be living in us. Now since
   goodness is a life, we have a twofold proof, that no goodness can be
   living in us, till we are born again of the Word and Spirit of God: for
   nature, as well as scripture, assures us, that God is originally the
   one good, and the one life; and therefore no good life can possibly be
   in us, but by the Word, life, and Spirit, of God having a birth in us.
   And from this birth alone it is, that the free, genuine works of
   goodness flow forth with the freedom of the divine life, wherewith the
   Spirit of God has made us free; loving and doing all manner of good,
   merely for goodness-sake; virtuous in all kind of virtue, purely for
   virtue-sake: then we are the natural true children of our heavenly
   Father, and do the works of heaven with a cheerful and willing mind.
   Then it is, that we are good in the manner as God is good, because it
   is his goodness that is born in us; we are perfect as he is perfect, we
   love as he loves, are patient as he is patient, we give as he gives, we
   forgive as he forgives, and resist evil only with good as he does.

   [Way-1-42] This, Academicus, is angelic goodness; and is the goodness
   of those who are born again of the Word, and become new creatures in
   the Spirit of Christ. This goodness our first father lost, when he
   chose to have the eyes of flesh and blood, and the spirit of this
   world, opened in him; and therefore our redeemer, who well knew what we
   had lost, and must have again, has taught us in our daily prayer, to
   ask for angelic goodness in these words, viz., "thy kingdom come, thy
   will be done on earth, as it is in heaven." But I have done, and I
   think you must have done, with your learned scruple about the word
   "angelic." And now, Theophilus, if you please, return to your subject
   with Humanus.

   [Way-1-43] Theophilus. Let me then tell you, Humanus, that I much
   approve of the way that you intend to proceed in. You are come directly
   to the truth and heart of the matter, and have hit upon the one only
   method of putting Deism to a full stand, by reducing Christianity to
   this one single great point, which so evidently contains the whole
   ground and nature of it.

   [Way-1-44] Now this one great point consists of two essential parts;
   1st, the fall of man from a divine angelic life into an earthly,
   bestial, corruptible, miserable life of this world. 2dly, the
   redemption of man, or his regaining his first angelic perfection, by a
   new birth of the divine nature, by the Word and Spirit of God. Stand
   steadily upon this true Christian ground; and then you will not only
   stand safely yourself, but you will have left the Deist no ground to
   stand upon. For here all the labored volumes of infidelity, with which
   these last ages have swarmed, are at once rendered useless, and cannot
   put so much as a little finger into this debate. Consult all, from
   Hobbes to the Moral Philosopher, and you consult in vain; their works
   are as dead as themselves, and unable to give forth one word against
   this Christianity. They had a much easier task upon their hands; for
   nothing can be easier than for reason to object, and continue
   objecting, to the extraordinary matters of the Old and New Testament. I
   don't mention this as an accusation of the Deists, or to charge them
   with the crafty contrivance of placing the merits of the cause where it
   is not. No, the learning of the Christian world must bear the blame of
   the fruitless disputes: the demonstrators of the truth and
   reasonableness of Christianity have betrayed their own cause, and left
   true Christianity unmentioned in their defenses of it. What a
   reasonableness of Christianity have some great names helped us to? Just
   as useful, and good to our fallen souls, as the reasonableness of
   consenting to the death of Pharaoh and his host in the Red Sea. But
   you, my friend, being rightly converted to Christianity, that began
   before the scriptures were written, and is as old as the creation and
   fall of man; keep close to its true and real ground; and, instead of
   showing the reasonableness of believing a long history of things, show
   the absolute necessity of man's dying to his present life, in order to
   have a better from God. This is the Christianity that began with the
   fall, and has been preached ever since to every son of fallen man, in
   every corner of the world; and by the same preacher that tells every
   man, that he ought to be better than he is. For was not man fallen from
   a better state than that he is now in, he could no more be ashamed or
   offended at anything that his nature prompts him to do, than the ox is
   ashamed at breaking into a good pasture. Every man, therefore, from the
   beginning of the world, has had Christianity and the gospel written and
   preached within him; as it contains the fall of man, and his want of
   being raised to a better state. But as we see, that the truth and
   reality of his fall, and the truth and reality of his redemption by a
   real birth from above, can be lost, nay disowned, amongst those that
   are daily reading and expounding the scriptures; so it is no wonder
   that the same should have happened to those, who had no scriptures to
   read. Justly therefore, Humanus, are churches and creeds, doctrines
   above and contrary to reason, miracles of the Old and New Testament,
   and all historical facts and matters, which are so great an harvest to
   the Deists; justly, I say, are they removed by you out of the debate;
   and the one great point above-mentioned only insisted upon, as the
   whole of the matter. For this one point gained, all is gained; and,
   till this point is cleared up, all the rest is but a debate about
   nothing.

   [Way-1-45] For if man is fallen from a divine life, no one need be
   told, that he can only be redeemed or saved from his fall by having the
   same divine life born in him again, or a second time. Nothing therefore
   touches the truth of the debate betwixt the Christian and the infidel,
   but that which proves with certainty, that man has, or has not, lost a
   divine life.

   [Way-1-46] If he is thus fallen, has died this death to a divine life;
   then the nature and necessity of the Christian new-birth sufficiently
   proves itself. But if it can be proved, that he is not thus fallen, but
   stands in that state and degree of life in which God created him; the
   Deists have reason enough to reject the Christian scheme of redemption.

   [Way-1-47] Strange it is therefore beyond expression, that every man,
   whether Christian or infidel, should not see, that here lies the whole
   of the matter; or that any learned defender of Christianity should
   think of beginning anywhere, or in anything, but where the redemption
   itself begins; or imagine there can be the least ground to propose a
   redemption to man, till he shows why, and from what, he is to be
   redeemed. Stranger is it still, if you consider, that Christians have
   nothing to excuse their wandering from this one great point, since both
   the Testaments bear so open a witness to it. "In the day that thou
   eatest thereof thou shalt surely die," says the Old Testament. "Except
   a man be born again from above, of the Word and Spirit of God, he
   cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven," says the New Testament.

   [Way-1-48] Thus do these two Testaments begin with the most open
   declarations of these two things; viz., the death of man to his first
   created life; 2ndly, his redemption only and solely by a real birth of
   the divine life, received again from above. What excuse therefore can
   be made for those who read the scripture, and yet overlook that very
   one point; not only so plainly declared, but which, in itself, is the
   one only ground and foundation upon which all the scripture stands? For
   had not man died, neither Moses, nor the prophets, had ever been in
   being. For man not fallen, but abiding in his first created perfection
   of life, had been as free from any outward law, as the light is from
   darkness. The keeping his own nature had been the keeping, and doing,
   and seeing, and knowing all that God required of him. So that neither
   law nor prophecy have any ground or reason, but because man is dead to
   his first life.

   [Way-1-49] But seeing man is dead to his first life, and living only in
   an earthly bestial world, under the power and slavery of the evil
   motions and tempers of gross flesh and blood; therefore Moses must come
   with his law, to set sin before him, and give him precepts of resisting
   and dying to all the lusts of this new earthly life, which he is fallen
   into: therefore, to seek for any other learning in or from Moses, than
   that of learning to resist and die to the tempers and passions of this
   earthly life, is knowing nothing right of Moses, nor of ourselves.

   [Way-1-50] Next after Moses came the prophets, or the spirit of
   prophecy, with its far-seeing sight, and declaration of glories to
   come. Now the ground of prophecy is this, it is because man is to be
   restored to his first glorious state; and therefore the spirit of
   prophecy comes forth from God to awaken hope and faith, expectation and
   desire in man; because these are the only powers that can draw him out
   of the mire of the earthly life, in which he sticks, and carry him up
   to his first heavenly state again. Nothing therefore is to be sought
   for in or from the prophets, but the increase of our hope, faith, and
   desire of the new birth of that glorious life which we have lost, and
   they foretold was to be had again.

   [Way-1-51] Thus, my friend, you see the importance of this one point;
   Moses and the prophets have no ground or reason but this, that man has
   lost his divine life; and that this same divine life is to be born
   again in him. Now seeing this is the ground and reason of the
   scriptures, therefore is it the one unerrring key to the right use of
   them. They have only this one intent, to make man know, resist, and
   abhor the working of his fallen earthly nature; and to turn the faith,
   hope, and longing desire of his heart to God: and therefore we are only
   to read them with this view, and to learn this one lesson from them.
   Whatever therefore occurs, that cannot be turned to this general end,
   but relates to only some temporal, occasional, or private matter, is of
   no more importance to us, than the cloak and parchments which St. Paul
   speaks of.

   [Way-1-52] How many hundred barns must there be, to hold all the
   learned volumes, that had never been written, had man looked upon the
   scriptures as having no other view or end, but to teach him to renounce
   the tempers of his fallen earthly nature, and live unto God in faith
   and prayer; to be born again of the divine nature! But this one end
   being overlooked by learned reason, Hebrew and Syriac, Arabic, Greek,
   and Latin, have been called in, to torture the scriptures into a chaos
   of confused opinions, that has covered the Christian world with
   darkness, and lost the only good that was to be had from the written
   Word of God. Whereas, standing upon the ground on which you stand, with
   only this one great point at heart, the scriptures are a plain, easy,
   and certain instruction; and no honest unlearned heart stands in need
   of any commentator to help him to all the benefit that can be had from
   scripture, or secure him from any hurtful error.

   [Way-1-53] Humanus. Indeed, Theophilus, my own experience can bear a
   full testimony to the truth of all that you have said. For upon my
   reading now the New Testament, with this key in my hand; viz., of man
   thus fallen, and thus called to a new birth from heaven; everything I
   read in it has spirit and life, and overflows my soul with such an
   unction, and sensibility of sweet doctrine, as I am not able to
   express. For whilst I consider it only as written to drive all earthly
   tempers and passions out of the soul, and inflame the heart with love
   and desire of the grace, the spirit, and the light and life of the
   heavenly nature, I can say, as the Jewish officers did, never man spoke
   like Christ and his apostles.

   [Way-1-54] Why was the Son of God made man? It was because man was to
   be made again a divine creature. Why did man want such a savior? It was
   because he was become earthly, mortal, gross flesh and blood. Now take
   Christ in this light, and consider man in this state, and then all that
   is said in the gospel stands in the fullest light.

   [Way-1-55] Thus, "Come unto me, all ye that are weary and heavy laden,
   and I will refresh you." How poor, how mean, and uncertain a sense is
   there in this, till you know, that man has lost his divine nature, and
   is fallen into a world that is all labor, burden, and misery! But as
   soon as this is known, then how easy, how plain, is the full and
   highest sense of these words, "Come unto me, all that labor, are weary
   and heavy laden, and I will refresh you!" I will bring to life that
   first happy state which you have lost. This is the note, the
   paraphrase, the expositor, the key to the true sense of every doctrine
   of Christ; which, though variously expressed to awaken the heart, is
   only one and the same thing. Thus, "Blessed are they that mourn, for
   they shall be comforted." But why so? Because he that is troubled at
   the corruption, vanity, and impurity of his fallen earthly state, has
   the comfort of the heavenly life ready for him. Again, "Blessed are
   they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be
   filled." How plain and great is the sense here, as soon as we know,
   that Christ is our righteousness; and that the righteous life of Christ
   in the soul, is that life which our first father lost! Therefore, to
   hunger and thirst after this righteousness, is the one way to be filled
   with that divine life, that we had lost. Again, "If any man thirst, let
   him come unto me and drink. And out of his belly shall flow rivers of
   living water." What can the Latin or Greek critic do here? Nothing at
   all. He will only try to make some excuse for the strangeness of the
   phrase. But when these words are read by one who knows that he, and all
   mankind, have lost the divine nature, he tastes and feels the glad
   tidings which they bring; and is in love with these sweet sounds, which
   promise such an overflowing return of heaven into his soul. Again, "I
   beseech you," says the apostle, "as strangers and pilgrims, abstain
   from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul." The critic looks into
   his books to see how Latin and Greek authors have used the words
   "stranger" and "pilgrim," and so some sense or other is given to the
   apostle; but the Christian, who knows, that man, wandering out of
   paradise, a colony of heaven, was taken captive by the stars and
   elements, to live in labor and toil, in sickness and pain, in hunger
   and thirst, in heat and cold amongst the beasts of the field; where
   evil spirits, like roaring lions, seek to devour him; he only knows in
   what truth and reality man is a poor stranger and distressed pilgrim
   upon earth. Again, "To the poor," saith Christ, "the gospel is
   preached." The critic only considers the several kinds of worldly
   poverty. But the Christian, who knows that the real great poverty of
   man consists in his having lost the riches and greatness of his first
   life, knows, that to this poor man the gospel is preached, because he
   only, who is sensible of this poverty, can hear and receive it. For to
   man, insensible of his fallen state, the glad tidings of the gospel are
   but like news from fairy land; and the cross of Christ can only be a
   stumbling-block and foolishness to him, whether he be a Christian, a
   Jew, or a Greek. Thus does it appear, that all the doctrines and
   sayings of Christ and his apostles are full of a comfortable, divine,
   and exalted sense, or mere empty words, just as the fall of man from a
   divine life is either owned or disowned. But I have done.

   [Way-1-56] Theophilus. Thus far then, Humanus, we are agreed, that the
   fall of man into the life and state of this world, is the whole ground
   of his redemption; and that a real birth of Christ in the soul, is the
   whole nature of it. Let me now only ask you, how you would endeavor to
   convince a man of his fallen state?

   [Way-1-57] Humanus. I would not begin with the account that Moses gives
   of it, for several reasons; but chiefly for these two: first, because
   the fall is not an historical matter; nor would a mere historical
   knowledge of it be of any use, or do any real good to him. Secondly,
   because Moses's account is not the proof of the fall, and therefore not
   to be appealed to as such.

   [Way-1-58] Moses is the first historian of natural death, and has
   recorded the death of the first man, and of many others who were born
   of him: but the proof that man is mortal lies not in Moses's history of
   the death of the first man, but in the known nature of man, and the
   world from which he has his life. Again, we do not want Moses to assure
   us, that there was a first man; that he had something from heaven, and
   something from the earth in him; and must have come into the world in
   another manner than all those who have descended from him. For every
   man is himself the infallible proof of this; Moses is only the
   historian that has recorded the when, and where, and how this first man
   came into the world, and what was his name. But the proof and certainty
   of the fact, that such a first man there must have been, lies not in
   Moses's account, but stands proved to every man from his own nature and
   state in this world.

   [Way-1-59] Thus it is with the fall; we have no more occasion to go to
   Moses, to prove that man and the world are in a fallen state, than to
   prove that man is a poor, miserable, weak, vain, distressed, corrupt,
   depraved, selfish, self-tormenting, perishing creature, and that the
   world is a sad mixture of false goods, and real evils; a mere scene of
   all sorts of trials, vexations, and miseries; all arising from the
   frame, and nature, and condition both of man and the world. This is the
   full infallible proof of the fall of man; which is not a thing learnt
   from any history, but shows itself everywhere, and every day, with such
   clearness as we see the sun. Moses is not the prover of the fact, that
   man is fallen; but is the recorder of the when and how, and the manner
   in which the fall happened.

   [Way-1-60] My first attempt therefore, upon any man, to convince him of
   the fall, as the ground of the redemption, should be an attempt to do
   that for him, which affliction, disappointments, sickness, pain, and
   the approach of death, have a natural tendency to do; viz., to convince
   him of the vanity, poverty, and misery of his life and condition in
   this world. For as this is the true proof of the fallen state of man,
   so man can only be convinced of it, by having this proof truly set
   before him. I would therefore appeal at first to nothing but his own
   nature and condition in the world; and show him how unreasonable, nay,
   impossible, it is, that a God, who has nothing in himself but infinite
   goodness and infinite happiness, should bring forth a race of
   intelligent creatures, that have neither natural goodness, nor natural
   happiness. The inspired saints of God say thus, "Man that is born of a
   woman hath but a short time to live, and is full of misery." Again,
   "Man walketh in a vain shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain." Now if
   what is here truly said of mankind, could be truly said of any order of
   the beasts and animals of the field, who could defend the goodness of
   God in bringing such creatures into such a state of life? Now though
   the Deist rejects the scriptures, considered as a volume of divine
   revelation, yet everything that he outwardly sees, and inwardly feels,
   demonstrates this capital truth of scripture, that man is in this poor
   and miserable state of life. And therefore, everything that we know of
   God, and everything that we know of man, is a daily irresistible proof,
   that man is in a fallen state. Look at the human infant just come out
   of the womb, you can hardly bear the sight; it is a picture of such
   deformity, nakedness, weakness, and helpless distress, as is not to be
   seen amongst the home- born animals of this world: the chicken has its
   birth from no sin, and therefore it comes forth in beauty; it runs and
   pecks as soon as its shell is broken: the pig and the calf go both to
   play, as soon as the dam is delivered of them; they are pleased with
   themselves, and please the eye that beholds their frolic state and
   beauteous clothing; whilst the new-born babe of a woman, that is to
   have an upright form, that is to view the heavens, and worship the God
   that made them, lies for months in gross ignorance, weakness, and
   impurity; as sad a spectacle when he first begins to breathe the life
   of this world, as when in the agonies of death he breathes his last.

   [Way-1-61] What is all this, but the strongest proof, that man is the
   only creature that belongs not to this world, but is fallen into it
   through sin? And therefore his birth, in such distress, bears all the
   marks of shame and weakness. Had he been originally of this world, it
   is necessary to suppose, that this world had done the highest honor to
   its highest creature; and that he had begun his life in greater
   perfection than any other animal, and brought with him a more beautiful
   clothing than the finest lilies of the field have. But, to go on: when
   the human infant is set upon his legs, and begins to act for himself,
   he soon becomes a more pitiable object than when crying in the cradle.
   The strength of his life is a mere strength of wild passions; his
   reason is craft, and selfish subtlety; he loves and hates only as flesh
   and blood prompt him, jails and gibbets cannot keep him from theft and
   murder. If he is rich, he is tormented with pride and ambition; if
   poor, with murmuring and discontent: be he which he will, sooner or
   later, disordered passions, disappointed lusts, fruitless labor, pains
   and sickness will tear him from this world in such travail as his
   mother felt, when she brought forth the sinful animal.

   [Way-1-62] Now all this evil and misery are purely the natural and
   necessary effect of his birth in the bestial flesh and blood of this
   world, and there is nothing in his natural state that can put a stop to
   it; he must be evil and miserable so long as he has only the life of
   this world in him. Therefore the absolute certainty of the fall, and
   the absolute necessity of a new birth, are truths, independently of
   scripture, plain to a demonstration. Thus, God is in himself infinite
   goodness, and infinite happiness; but man, in his present earthly birth
   and life, can neither have goodness or happiness, therefore his present
   state of life could not be brought forth by a God who is all goodness
   and happiness. Thus every man, that believes in a creator infinitely
   perfect, is under a necessity of believing the whole ground of
   Christian redemption, namely, that man hath some way or other lost that
   perfection of life which he had at first from his creator.

   [Way-1-63] But the Christian has yet an additional proof of his matter,
   because the scriptures, which with him are infallible, so frequently
   and openly bear witness to it.

   [Way-1-64] Thus, "Let us make man in our image; according to our own
   likeness." How great, how divine, is this beginning of man? How can
   there be any evil or misery, any vanity or weakness, in a creature so
   brought forth? But now what is become of this man? For if you look at
   man just coming out of the womb, the pitiable object above described,
   what can be so absurd, as to call this birth, his creation in the
   likeness and after the image of God? Now what is said of the first man,
   is not spoken of one person, but of the human nature; for the first man
   was only the first instance of that which mankind were to be. He had no
   perfection peculiar to himself, but that of being the first man; and
   had he stood, all that came from him, had come to life as he did, in
   the same strength and glory of perfection, and not been born of a
   bestial womb, like the wild ass's colt. Again, set the following text
   against Moses's perfection of the first image of God, "Man that is born
   of a woman hath but a short time to live, and is full of misery."

   [Way-1-65] Is not this a full proof, that the first created life of man
   is quite dead, and that an earthly life of misery is risen up instead
   of it? Again, the apostle saith, "The natural man knoweth not the
   things of God; they are foolishness unto him." Can this natural man,
   the man of earthly flesh and blood, that can have no acquaintance with,
   or knowledge of God, to whom the "things of God are foolishness"; can
   this be the man first created in the image and likeness of God? What
   can be more absurd than such a thought? Or what excuse can be made for
   that learning which cannot see from so plain a scripture, that human
   nature, now, is not that human nature, which it was at first created,
   but is dead to that first life, which it had in the image and likeness
   of God, or the things of God could not possibly be foolishness to it?
   But I will end this matter with these borrowed words, "We were no more
   created to be in the sorrows, burdens, and anguish of an earthly life,
   than the angels were created to be in the wrath and darkness of hell.
   It is as contrary to the will and goodness of God towards us, that we
   are out of paradise, as it is contradictory to the designs and goodness
   of God towards the angels, that some of them are out of heaven,
   prisoners of darkness.

   [Way-1-66] "The grossness, impurity, sickness, pain, and corruption of
   our bodies, is brought upon us by ourselves, in the same manner as the
   hideous, serpentine, form of the devils are brought upon them. How
   absurd, and even blasphemous would it be, to say with the scripture and
   the church, "that we are children of wrath, and born in sin," if we had
   that nature, which God at first gave us? What a reproach upon God, to
   say, that this world is a valley of misery, a shadow of death, full of
   disorders, snares, evils, and temptations, if this was an original
   creation, or that state of things for which God created us? Is it not
   as consistent with the goodness and perfection of God, to speak of the
   misery and disorder that unfallen holy angels find above, and of the
   vanity, emptiness, and sorrow of their heavenly state, as to speak of
   the misery of men, and the sorrows of this world, if men and the world
   were in that order, in which God at first had placed them? If God could
   make any place poor and vain, and create any beings into a state of
   vanity and vexation of spirit, he might do so in all places, and to all
   beings."* {*Serious Answer to Dr.Trapp on the Sin. of being Righteous
   overmuch, p. 35.}

   [Way-1-67] Theophilus. You have put the fall, Humanus, upon its right
   proof, and shown great judgment in your intended method of converting
   anyone to the belief of it. You have set the whole matter in so just a
   light, that I have nothing that I would add to it.

   [Way-1-68] Humanus. Give me leave, gentlemen, just to put in a word or
   two concerning another plain indication, that man has lost that life
   and nature, in which he was first created. Reason has been my god, and
   is the vain idol of modern Deism, and modern Christianity; and yet
   human ignorance, infirmity, and mortality; they all began together;
   they are inseparable; they generate and are generated from one another;
   they are the life of each other; and they must live and die together,
   and all bear the same witness to the fallen state of man. For no
   creature can come from the hands of God into a state of any ignorance
   of anything, that is fit and proper to be known by it. This is as
   impossible as for God to have an envious, or evil will. Now all right
   and natural knowledge, in whatever creature it is, is sensible,
   intuitive, and its own evidence. But opinion, reasoning, or doubting
   (for they are all but one thing) can only then begin when the creature
   has lost its first right and natural state, and is got somewhere, and
   become somewhat, that it cannot tell what to make of. Then begins
   doubting, from thence reasoning, from thence debating; and this is the
   high birth of our magnified reason, as nobly born, as groping is, which
   has its beginning in and from darkness, or the loss of light. Hence we
   have a full proof, that man has lost his first natural state in which
   God created him. For reasoning, doubt, and perplexity in any creature,
   is the effect of some fall, or departure from its first state of
   nature, and shows, that it wants, and is seeking, something that its
   nature would have, but knows not how to come at it. The beasts seek not
   after truth; a plain proof, that it has no relation to them; has no
   suitableness to their nature, nor ever belonged to them. Man is in
   quest of it, in perplexity about it, cannot come at it; takes lies to
   be truth, and truth to be lies; a plain proof, both that he has it not,
   and yet has had it, was created in it, and for it; for nothing can seek
   for anything, but that which is lost, and is wanted; nor could it form
   the least idea of it, but because it has belonged to it, and ought to
   be his.

   [Way-1-69] The beasts have no ignorance of anything, that concerns
   them; but have all the sensible, intuitive knowledge of everything that
   is the good of their nature. But man left to his reason is all over
   ignorance, doubt, conjecture, and perlexity in matters of the highest
   moment, about what he himself is, what is his chief good, where he is
   to seek it, and how to obtain it. For to ask your reason, how God is
   your God, how you are in him, and from him, what he is in himself, and
   what he is in you, is but like asking your hands to feel out the
   thickness, or the thinness, of the light. To ask your reason, whether
   the soul of man is immortal in its nature, is to as good purpose, is
   going no father out of the way, than if you was to ask your eyes to
   show you, where extension begins, and where it ends. To ask your
   reason, whether man has anything of God, or the divine nature in him,
   is just as suitable to the nature and power of your reason, as if you
   was to ask your nose, whether this or that sweet, aromatic smell in the
   garden, has any heavenly power mixed with, and opening itself in it.

   [Way-1-70] Reason, therefore, is so far from being able to help man to
   that knowledge, which his nature and condition wants, that it can only
   help his ignorance to increase and fructify in doubts, fictions, and
   absurd debates. And the thing cannot be otherwise; man must walk in a
   vain shadow, so long as reason is his oracle. For nothing can act
   suitably to nature, find its true state in nature, or answer the end of
   its creation by the power of reason; because reason is not the life,
   the power, or former of nature; and therefore has no more power over
   nature, than over the powers and principles of vegetation, either in
   the body of man, or any other creature. He therefore who turns to his
   reason, as the true power and light of his nature, betrays the same
   ignorance of the whole nature, power, and office of reason, as if he
   was to try to smell with his eyes, or see with his nose. For as each of
   these senses has only its one work or power, which it cannot alter, or
   exceed; so reason has only its one work or power, which it cannot
   alter, or exceed; and that one work is, to be a bare observer and
   comparer of things that manifest themselves to it by the senses. This
   is as much its one only power, as seeing is the one only power of the
   eyes. When therefore reason takes upon it to determine on things not
   manifested to it by the senses, as to judge about divine new birth, a
   divine light, and divine faith; or how the soul wants, or does not want
   God. it is then as much out of its place and office, as the eye that
   takes upon it to smell; and its true name and nature is, whim, humor,
   caprice, conjecture, opinion, fancy, and every other species of
   blindness, and passion.

   [Way-1-71] Now suppose man to come thus into the world, with this chief
   difference from other creatures; that he is at a loss to find out what
   he is, how he is to live, and what he is to seek, as his chief
   happiness; what he is to own of a God, of providence, religion. Suppose
   him to have faculties that put him upon this search, and no faculties,
   that can satisfy his inquiry; and what can you suppose more miserable
   to himself, or more unworthy of a good creator? Therefore, if you will
   not suppose a God, that has been good to all creatures, and given every
   animal its proper light of nature, except man, you must be forced to
   own, that man has certainly lost the true light and perfection of his
   nature, which God at first gave him.

   [Way-1-72] But I believe Academicus wants to say something, and
   therefore I have done.

   [Way-1-73] Academicus. I was only going to say, that every attribute of
   God, everything that sense and reason force us to see, and know, and
   feel, both of ourselves, and the world, join with the letter and spirit
   of all scripture in attesting, that man has certainly had a divine
   life, to which he has certainly died. But yet I must own it is very
   difficult to conceive, how a creature brought forth in so high
   perfection, in such enjoyment of the life, light, and Spirit of God,
   could either deceive himself, or be deceived by another.

   [Way-1-74] Theophilus. All that we want to know, my friend, is the
   certainty of the fact, and this is of the greatest moment to us: for
   this is it, that takes us from the herd of earthly animals, and lays
   the foundation of religion, and divine virtue. For had not a divine
   life at first been in us, we should be now at the same distance from
   all true virtue and goodness, and as incapable of forming the least
   thought or desire of it, as other animals; and should have nothing to
   do, but to look to ourselves, live to our earthly nature, and make the
   most of this world. For this is the only wisdom and goodness, that an
   earthly nature is capable of, whether it be a man, or a fox. The
   certainty therefore of the fact, of our first divine birth, is all;
   nothing more need be inquired after. For on this ground stands all our
   comfort; hence it is, that, in faith and hope, we can look up to God as
   our Father, to heaven as our native country, and have the honor to be
   accounted only as strangers and pilgrims upon earth.

   [Way-1-75] But however, to remove your difficulty, I shall give you a
   little sketch of the possibility of man's falling, although created in
   the perfection abovementioned.

   [Way-1-76] Now supposing God to have brought a new intelligent creature
   into a new world, all the attributes of God oblige us to suppose this
   creature to be created in a perfect state both inwardly and outwardly.
   As intelligent, it must partake of the divine understanding; as living,
   it must have a degree of the divine life in it; as good, it must have a
   birth of the divine goodness in it; as an offspring of divine love, it
   must have a divine happiness, for the enjoyment of which the love of
   God created it. Now there is but one possible way, for this intelligent
   creature, thus endowed, to fall from, or lose the happiness of its
   first created state. It cannot knowingly choose misery, or the loss of
   its happiness: therefore it can only fall by such an ignorance, or
   power of falling as is consistent with its perfect state. Now this
   power lay wholly in the newness of its life: it only began to find
   itself an intelligent being; and yet had a power of looking with the
   eyes of its understanding either inwards, or outwards; upwards, or
   downwards. It had a power of acquiescing and rejoicing in that, which
   it found itself to be, and adoring that power and goodness which had
   brought it into the possession of such a nature: and it had a power of
   wandering into conjectures, and reasons about that, which it was not.
   Now as a free, intelligent creature, it could not be without this power
   of thus turning its intelligent eye; and yet, as a beginning creature,
   that had no experience, this power could not be free from a possibility
   of wandering; and therefore its power of wandering was not a defect,
   but a necessary part of its first perfect state. Now in this
   possibility of wandering with its intelligent eye, looking where it
   ought not, and entering into conjectures about that, which it was not,
   may be clearly seen the possibility of its falling from a state of high
   perfection.

   [Way-1-77] This is the one only possible way for a good, intelligent,
   new creature to lose its happiness. And I think it may justly be
   affirmed, that the Mosaic account of the fall of man is exactly this
   very case; namely, how the eye of his new unexperienced understanding,
   beginning to cast a wandering look into that, which he was not, was by
   an unsuspected subtlety, or serpent, drawn into a reasoning and
   conjecturing about a certain good and evil, which were no part of his
   own created state.

   [Way-1-78] Which inquiry, being given into, ended in the real knowledge
   of this good and evil, the sensibility of which became an immediate
   death to his first divine life, destroyed the angelic image in the
   likeness of God, and set a gross, earthly, naked, ashamed, frighted,
   wretched animal of bestial flesh and blood in its place, the only
   animal to which this new knowledge of good and evil could belong.

   [Way-1-79] Supposing therefore the fall of man, which is a fact
   attested, and proved by everything we know of God, ourselves, and the
   world; the Mosaic account of it has every mark of truth, sobriety, and
   justness, as being a plain and easy description of the one only way, by
   which a creature so endowed could change or lose its first happy state.

   [Way-1-80] Academicus. Truly, Theophilus, you have given a most natural
   and full solution of my difficulty, by which, I suppose, you mean as
   well to explain the fall of angels, as of men. But, sir, if that pride,
   to which their fall is charged, must have stolen upon them, in that
   same unsuspected way, in which the longing after the tree of good and
   evil insinuated itself into man; viz., from a wandering look into that,
   which they were not, occasioned by the newness of their untried life,
   in which they had but just began to be; suffer me then, to ask, why the
   fallen angels were not, at first, the immediate objects of divine mercy
   and goodness? Why they are to be forever prisoners of a never-ending
   hell? Or, are you of the opinion, that angels, as well as men, will be
   at last brought back to their first state?

   [Way-1-81] Theophilus. Your questions, Academicus, seem to have too
   much of curiosity in them: but, as I hope you will not give way to this
   temper, so I will, for once, comply with your demands.

   [Way-1-82] The fall of angels must be supposed to have been as soon
   after their creation, as that of Adam. Had they stood any time in their
   new-created state, they had been in one and the same impossibility of
   falling, as the angels that are now in heaven. For no pure,
   intelligent, good, and holy created being, can possibly lose this
   divine state of perfection, but through the first use of its untried
   state and powers. The manner of Adam's falling into the life of this
   world plainly shows the manner how the angels fell into hell, namely,
   at first only by looking and conjecturing with their intelligent eye
   into that, which they were not, which was not opened in them, but was
   hid in God. This looking went on till it became a lust and strong
   longing after that somewhat; just as it had done in Adam, who so gazed
   upon the earthly good and evil, till it opened itself in him. Adam
   looked only at that which was creaturely, and in a life below him; and
   therefore only that lower, creaturely, bestial life was brought forth
   in him. But the angel turning his wandering look into that height and
   depth which was not creaturely, but hid in God; namely, into the might
   and strength of eternity, that he might know how the creaturely life
   was kindled by it; and thinking himself by his exalted nature, to be as
   near to this great power, and as capable of entering into it, as Adam
   thought himself near to, and capable of knowing the good and evil of
   the earthly life; and as Adam thought to be like God in this new
   knowledge; so the angel imagined to be like God, could he enter into
   this knowledge, how the might of God kindled the creaturely life, for
   then he himself should have the power of creating or kindling the
   creaturely life; and as Adam's imagination brought forth a lust and
   longing, which could not be stopped, till the earthly knowledge, and
   earthly life, had opened itself in him; so the angel's imagination
   begot such a lust and longing to know the ground and original of life,
   as would not be stopped till the ground and original of life, namely,
   that depth of darkness and fire, in and from which every creaturely
   life must begin, was totally opened in him, and he as much swallowed up
   by hell, as Adam was by the earthly life. Thus you may see, how the
   same aspiring imagination (but with regard to different matters) rising
   in the same manner, and from the same cause, in both these creatures,
   and working itself up into a lust and longing, brought the one from
   heaven into hell, and the other from paradise into a bestial world.

   [Way-1-83] Now as the lust of Adam, when it had obtained its desire,
   opened all the properties and tempers of the bestial life in him; so
   the lust of the angel, when it got what it wanted; viz., the ground and
   original of the creaturely life, which is darkness and fire;
   immediately opened all the dreadful properties of darkness and fire in
   him, which at once swallowed up or extinguished the angelic nature.
   Hence wrath, hatred, pride, envy, malice, and every enmity to light and
   love, are the one only life of the fallen angel; and he can will and
   act nothing else, but as these properties of darkness and fire drive
   him.

   [Way-1-84] To ask therefore, why the fallen angels continue in their
   state, is to ask, why darkness is not made to be light? For the root
   and ground of nature is unchangeable; it keeps its own nature, or it
   could not be the ground; it must stand always in its own place, and be
   only the ground and root; it cannot rise higher than the root, no more
   than the root of the tree can be its branches and fruit. The angels,
   therefore, being fallen into the ground and root of nature, have only
   the working life of the ground and root of nature in them; and
   therefore seem to be as unchangeable, and incapable of having any
   other, as the root itself is.

   [Way-1-85] To ask therefore, why the fallen angels were not helped by
   the mercy and goodness of God, as fallen man was; is like asking, why
   the refreshing dew of heaven does not do that to flint, which it does
   to the vegetable plant? For as the nature of the flint is too hard, and
   too much compacted, to receive any alteration from the sweet softness
   of refreshing water; so the fallen angel, like the flint, being shut up
   in the wrathful working of its own hard darkness and fire, the goodness
   of God can have no entrance into it.

   [Way-1-86] For what are we to understand by the mercy and goodness of
   God? His mercy is his patience. And his goodness, is his light, and
   Word, and Holy Spirit. Now every creature has the benefit of divine
   patience; but no creature can have his goodness, but that which is
   capable of receiving his light, and Holy Spirit.

   [Way-1-87] And his light, and Holy Spirit, cannot enter into a
   creature, as an external, additional thing, that may be given to it,
   whether it will, or not, but must be brought forth as a birth in it.
   For the light, and Spirit of God can be nowhere, but as a birth,
   whether it be in God, or the creature. And therefore the goodness of
   God can be imparted to no creature, but that which is capable of a
   birth of the light and Spirit of God, or, in the words of scripture,
   unless it be "born of the Word and Spirit of God."

   [Way-1-88] This therefore you may rest upon, as a certain truth, that
   the one only reason, why the fallen angels have as yet had nothing of
   the Spirit or light of God breathed into, or born in them, is, because
   they are as yet utterly incapable of such a birth, or of being helped
   by the divine goodness. For as flame cannot communicate itself to
   flint, nor the Spirit of God to a beast; because the flint stands in
   the utmost contrariety to flame, and the beast in a total incapacity of
   holiness; so the fallen angel is in its working life altogether
   incapable of receiving the Spirit and life of God into it. Were it not
   thus, angels had been helped, as early as man: for the goodness, or the
   light and Spirit of God loses no time, but stands always in the same
   fullness of communication of itself to every creature that is capable
   of receiving it.

   [Way-1-89] And therefore it is, that fallen man was immediately helped,
   because he fell only into earthly flesh and blood, in which the light
   of this world is kindled, which light has something of heaven in it,
   and was kindled by the light of heaven.

   [Way-1-90] And therefore the goodness of God, or his light, and Holy
   Spirit, could come to man's assistance in the light of this life, and
   therein begin a covenant of redemption with him. For in this light of
   his life, which is a ray of heaven, the inspoken Word in paradise could
   enter, and have communion with it, and make itself to be a beginning of
   salvation to all those, who by faith and hope should lay hold of it,
   and endeavor after a new birth from it. Thus stands the ground and
   reason why men, and not angels, were immediately helped at their fall.

   [Way-1-91] As to your last question, whether I believe the final
   restoration of all the fallen angels; I shall only say, that neither
   ancient nor modern writers, on either side of the question, have
   touched the true merits of the cause, or spoke to that point on which
   the decision of the matter wholly rests.

   [Way-1-92] For it can neither be sufficiently affirmed, nor
   sufficiently denied, by any arguments drawn either from the divine
   attributes, or texts of scripture; for they cannot come up to the point
   in question. But the true ground and merit of the cause lies solely in
   the possibility of the thing, which no one has attempted to prove, nor
   perhaps is anyone able to do it; namely, to show from a true ground,
   that the diabolical nature is possible to be altered. Darkness can by
   no omnipotence be made to be light; it can only be suppressed, or
   overcome by it, or forced to be hid under it, as heaven hides or
   overcomes hell; but still the darkness has its first nature, never to
   be changed.

   [Way-1-93] Now if anyone can show, that the devils are not essentially
   evil, as darkness is essentially dark, but have only such an accidental
   difference from goodness, as ice has from water, or a flint from
   transparent glass; then their restoration is possible, and they will
   infallibly have all their evil removed out of them by the goodness of
   God.

   [Way-1-94] But unless it could be shown from a true ground in nature,
   that the fallen angels must have something of the heavenly life in
   them, though shut up in a thousand times harder death, than fire is in
   the dark flint, no length of time, or anything else, can produce any
   alteration, or cessation of their evil nature.

   [Way-1-95] For time cannot alter the nature or essence of things; it
   only suffers that to come to pass which is possible, and consistent
   with the nature of things. No length of time can make a circle to have,
   or give forth, the properties of a right line.

   [Way-1-96] Now if the fallen angels have nothing heavenly in them, but
   stand in as full a contrariety to all that is heavenly, as the circle
   does to the properties of the right line; then goodness is as
   impossible to be ever awakened in them, as in a beast. The beast must
   always be what it was at first; and for this reason, because nothing
   but the bestial nature is in it: if therefore the fallen angel is
   totally hellish, as the beast is bestial, it must always be what it is.

   [Way-1-97] But we have launched far enough in a deep that does not
   belong unto us; and which cannot be sufficiently affirmed or denied but
   from the known possibility, or the known impossibility, of the thing,
   which does not yet appear. If it is possible, I am heartily glad of it;
   and am also sure enough, that it will then come to pass in its own
   time. For if he could not be thought to be a good man, who did not do
   all that he could to make sinners become holy and happy in goodness, we
   may be sure enough that the boundless goodness of God, will set no
   bounds to itself, but remove every misery from every creature that is
   capable of it. But let me now return to Humanus, and ask him, that,
   supposing he could not convince a man of the certainty of his fallen
   state, how he would farther proceed with him.

   [Way-1-98] Humanus. Truly, Theophilus, I would proceed no farther at
   all; and for this good reason, because I should then have nothing to
   proceed upon. Did I certainly know of an infallible remedy for every
   disorder of the eyes, only to be had by going to China for it, I should
   not attempt to persuade a man, who believed his eyes to be sound and
   good, to leave all that he had, and go to China for this infallible
   remedy for bad eyes.

   [Way-1-99] Now to press a man to deny himself, and leave all that he
   hath in the enjoyments of flesh and blood, in order to be reconciled to
   God, who believes himself to be in the same good state, in which God
   created him, seems to be as wild a project, as to desire him who is
   well pleased with the goodness of his sight, to go to the Indies to be
   helped to see.

   [Way-1-100] And indeed I very well know, from former experience, that
   all discourse about the reasonableness of Christianity, the doctrine of
   the cross, the exceeding love of God in giving so great a savior, with
   many more things of the like nature, were mere empty sounds, heard with
   the greatest indifference, and incapable of raising the least
   seriousness in me, merely because I had not the least notion or
   suspicion of the truth and greatness of my fallen state, and therefore
   was not the man who had any fitness to be affected with these matters.
   And thence it was that Christ said, "Come unto me, all ye that labor,
   and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you"; as plain as if he had
   said, No one else can come to me, nor anyone else be refreshed by me.

   [Way-1-101] Here therefore, in my humble opinion, should all begin, who
   would propagate Christianity, or make true converts to it, and here
   stop, as Christ did. It is only the weary, and heavy laden, that are
   fitted to be converts, or refreshed; and therefore we can no way help a
   man to be a Christian, or fit him to be refreshed by Christ, but by
   bringing him into a full sensibility of the evil, and burden, and
   vanity of his natural state, till some good providence awakens him out
   of it; and not make proposals to him of the reasonableness of believing
   the Holy Trinity, the incarnation of the Son of God, and the necessity
   of his sufferings and death. for this method is full as absurd, as to
   enter into solemn debate with a confessed atheist, about the
   reasonableness of worshiping God in spirit and truth; for, as the
   excellence of a God is the only ground of proving that he ought to be
   worshiped in spirit and truth, so the certainty and belief of our
   fallen state is the only ground of showing the reasonableness of the
   mysteries of redemption. And he that disowns the fall of man from a
   divine life, has all the same reasons for rejecting the mysteries of
   our salvation, as the atheist has to reject the doctrines of a
   spiritual worship of God. Therefore, to expose the mysteries of our
   salvation to the wrangle of a debate with an unbeliever of the fall of
   man, which mysteries have no other ground to stand upon, is not only
   helping him to an easy triumph over you, but is the most likely method
   to prevent his ever becoming a Christian. For seeing how easily he can
   ridicule mysteries, which, to him in his present state, can have no
   reasonableness in them, he is put into the most likely way of living
   and dying in a hardened contempt of them. Whereas if you stick close to
   the one true ground of Christianity, and only proceed as that proceeds,
   and make the unbeliever no offers of any other Christianity, but that
   which is to begin with the acknowledged sensibility of the fall of
   human nature from its first divine life; you stop where you ought to
   stop, and rob him of all power and pretense of meddling with the other
   mysteries of salvation.

   [Way-1-102] The one business then upon his hands, if he will hold out
   against you, must be to deny his reason and senses, and maintain, in
   spite of both, that man is not fallen, but is by nature holy, just,
   good, and happy both in body and soul; and that mankind, and the world
   they are in, have all that goodness and happiness, which they could be
   supposed to have from an infinitely good and happy God; and who can
   will nothing in the creature but goodness and happiness. Here you bring
   the Deist to his proper work, and all the contradiction to sense and
   reason will lie on his side: you set Christianity upon its true ground;
   and whoever thus defends it, as it ought to be defended, not only does
   justice to the Christian cause, but acts the most kind and friendly
   part towards those who oppose it merely through a misunderstanding of
   its true ground and nature; which I will venture to say is the case of
   all the sober well-meaning Deists. For Deism has no natural foundation,
   or ground of its own, to stand upon; it does not grow from any root or
   strength within itself, but is what it is merely from the bad state of
   Christendom, and the miserable use that heathenish learning, and
   worldly policy, have made of the gospel. If it (Deism) seems to itself
   to be strong and well-grounded, it is merely because it can so easily
   object to church-doctrines, and scholastic opinions: if it seems to
   itself to be good it is because it can so easily lay open the evils
   which Christians and churches bring upon one another: if it seems to
   itself to be highly rational, its reason is, because it is free from
   that number of absurdities and contradictions which Christian churches
   lay to the charge of one another. Lastly, if it keeps off all fearful
   forebodings of the consequences of not receiving the gospel, it is
   because it so plainly sees, that Christians say, "Hail, master," kiss
   the gospel, and then break every part of it.

   [Way-1-103] This is the true height, and depth, and total strength of
   Deism or infidelity; it never had any other support in myself but this;
   nor did I ever converse with a Deist, who carried the matter higher or
   farther than this, to support the cause. Hence it is, that you made so
   speedy a convert of me, by showing me such a Christianity as I never
   heard of before; and stripped of everything that gave me power to
   oppose it. Had you proceeded in the way practiced by most defenders of
   the gospel, you had left me just as you found me, if not more confirmed
   in my old way. But as you have justly removed all controversy about
   doctrines from the merits of the cause, and shown that it all lies in
   this one short, plain, and decisive point, namely the fall of man; a
   fall proved and demonstrated to all my senses and reason, by every
   height and depth of nature, by every kind of misery, evil, and sin in
   the world, by everything we know of God, ourselves, and the world we
   live in; the ground and foundation of Christianity is undeniable, and
   no one can be too speedy a convert to the belief of it. And as you have
   also shown, that the whole nature of the gospel redemption means
   nothing but the one, true, and only possible way of delivering man from
   his miserable state in this world; Christianity is shown to be the most
   intelligible and desirable thing that the heart of man can think of.
   And thus, contrary to all expectation, the tables are quite turned;
   Deism can no longer be founded on argument, and Christianity is as
   self- evident as our senses: all learning on both sides, either for or
   against it, is insignificant; Christianity stands upon a bottom quite
   superior to it, and may be the sure possession of every plain man, who
   has sense enough to know whether he is happy or unhappy, good or evil.
   For this natural knowledge, if adhered to, is every man's sure guide to
   that one salvation preached by the gospel. Which gospel stands in no
   more need of learning and critical art now, than it did when Christ was
   preaching it upon earth. How absurd would it have been for any critics
   in Greek and Hebrew, to have followed Christ and his apostles, as
   necessary explainers of their hard words, which called for nothing in
   the hearers but penitent hearts turned to God; and declared, that they
   only "who were of God, could hear the Word of God!" How strange, that
   Christ should choose only illiterate men to preach the gospel of the
   kingdom of God, if only great scholars could rightly understand what
   they said! Again, supposing learned men to have only the true fitness
   to understand the word of scripture, and that the plain man is to
   receive it from them, how must he know which are the scholars that have
   the right knowledge? From whence is he to have this information? For no
   one need be told, that ever since learning has borne rule in the
   church, learned doctors have contradicted and condemned one another in
   every essential point of the Christian doctrine. Thousands of learned
   men tell the illiterate, they are lost in this or that church; and
   thousands of learned men tell them, they are lost, if they leave it.

   [Way-1-104] If therefore Christianity is in the hands of scholars, how
   must the plain man come at it? Must he, though unable to understand
   scripture, for want of learning, tell which learned man is in the
   right, and which is not? If so, the unlearned man has much the greatest
   ability, since he is to do that for scholars, which they cannot do for
   themselves.

   [Way-1-105] But the truth of the matter is this; Christian redemption
   is God's mercy to all mankind; but it could not be so, if every fallen
   man, as such, had not some fitness and capacity to lay hold of it. It
   must have no dependence upon times and places, or the ages and several
   conditions of the world, or any outward circumstance of life; as the
   first man partook of it, so must the last; the learned linguist, and
   the blind, the deaf and dumb, have but one and the same common way of
   finding life in it. And he that writes large commentaries upon the
   whole Bible, must be saved by something full as different from book
   knowledge, as they were, who lived when there was neither book nor any
   alphabet in the world.

   [Way-1-106] For this salvation, which is God's mercy to the fallen soul
   of man, merely as fallen, must be something that meets every man; and
   which every man, as fallen, has something that directs him to turn to
   it. For as the fall of man is the reason of this mercy, so the fall
   must be the guide to it; the want must show the thing that is wanted.
   And therefore the manifestation of this one salvation, or mercy to man,
   must have a nature suitable, not to this or that great reader of
   history, or able critic in Hebrew roots and Greek phrases, but suitable
   to the common state and condition of every son of Adam. It must be
   something as grounded in human nature, as the fall itself is, which
   wants no art to make it known; but to which the common nature of man is
   the only guide in one man, as well as another. Now this something,
   which is thus obvious to every man, and which opens the way to
   Christian redemption in every soul, is a sense of the vanity and misery
   of this world; and a prayer of faith and hope to God, to be raised to a
   better state.

   [Way-1-107] Now in this sensibility, which every man's own nature leads
   him into, lies the whole of man's salvation; here the mercy of God and
   the misery of man are met together; here the fall and the redemption
   kiss each other. This is the Christianity which is as old as the fall;
   which alone saved the first man, and can alone save the last. This is
   it on which hang all the law and the prophets, and which fulfills them
   both; for they have only this end, to turn man from the lusts of this
   life, to a desire, and faith, and hope of a better. Thus does the whole
   of Christian redemption, considered on the part of man, stand in this
   degree of nearness and plainness to all mankind; it is as simple and
   plain as the feeling our own evil and misery, and as natural as the
   desire of being saved and delivered from it.

   [Way-1-108] This is the Christianity which every man must first be made
   sensible of, not from hearsay, but as a growth or degree of life within
   himself, before he can have any fitness, or the least pretense to judge
   or speak a word about the further mysteries of the gospel. But here I
   stop.

   [Way-1-109] Theophilus. Well, Humanus, I have now pushed the matter
   with you, as far as I intended; and you have given me full proof of the
   truth and solidity of your own conversion, and your ability to do good
   amongst your old brethren. You must now enter the lists with them; not
   to charge them with ignorance, ill will, or profaneness of spirit, but
   only to try, in the spirit of love and meekness, to undeceive them, in
   the manner you have been undeceived; and to show them, that
   Christianity is by no means that thing, which you and they have so long
   disliked.

   [Way-1-110] Nothing can be more right than your resolution not to enter
   into debate about the gospel doctrines, or propose the reasonableness
   of them to anyone, till he owns himself sensibly convinced of the
   forementioned fall of man; and stands in a full desire to be saved, or
   delivered from it. And if that time never comes, you must leave him, as
   in the same incapacity to hear or judge of the doctrines of the Holy
   Trinity, in the incarnation of the Son of God, the operation of the
   Holy Spirit, as Epicurus would be. For every man that cleaves to this
   world, that is in love with it, and its earthly enjoyments, is a
   disciple of Epicurus, and sticks in the same mire of atheism, as he
   did, whether he be a modern Deist, a Popish or Protestant Christian, an
   Arian, or an orthodox teacher. For all these distinctions are without
   any difference, if this world has the possession and government of his
   heart. For the whole of the matter lies solely in this, whether heaven,
   or earth, hath the heart and government of man. Nothing divides the
   worshipers of the true God from idolaters but this: where earth
   possesses and rules the heart, there all are of one and the same
   religion, and worship one and the same god, however they may be
   distinguished by sect or party.

   [Way-1-111] And wherever the heart is weary of the evil and vanity of
   the earthly life, and looking up to God for an heavenly nature, there
   all are one of the true religion, and worshipers of the true God,
   however distant they may be from one another, as to time or place. But
   enough has been said of this matter.

   [Way-1-112] Let me now only, before we break up, observe to you the
   true ground and nature of gospel Christianity: I call it so by way of
   distinction from that original universal Christianity, which began with
   Adam; was the religion of the patriarchs, of Moses and the prophets,
   and of every penitent man in every part of the world, that had faith
   and hope towards God, to be delivered from the evil of this world.

   [Way-1-113] But when the Son of God had taken a birth in and from the
   human nature, had finished all the wonders that belonged to our
   redemption, and was sat down at the right hand of God in heaven, then a
   heavenly kingdom was set up on earth, and the Holy Spirit came down
   from heaven, or was given to the flock of Christ in such a degree of
   birth and life, as never was, nor could be given to the human nature,
   till Christ, the redeemer of the human nature, was glorified. But when
   the humanity of Christ, our second Adam, was glorified, and became all
   heavenly, then the heavenly life, the comfort, and power, and presence
   of the Holy Spirit, was the gift which he gave to his brethren, his
   friends and followers, which he had left upon earth.

   [Way-1-114] The Holy Ghost descended in the shape of cloven tongues of
   fire on the heads of those, that were to begin and open the new powers
   of a divine life set up amongst men. This was the beginning and
   manifestation of the whole nature and power of gospel Christianity, a
   thing as different from what was Christianity before, as the possession
   of the thing hoped for is different from hope, or deliverance different
   from the desire or expectation of it. Hence the apostles were new men,
   entered into a new kingdom come down from heaven, enlightened with new
   light, inflamed with new love, and preached not any absent or distant
   thing, but Jesus Christ, as the wisdom and power of God, felt and found
   within them, and as a power of God ready to be communicated in the same
   manner, as a new birth from above, to all that would repent and believe
   in him. It was to this change of nature, of life, and spirit, to this
   certain immediate deliverance from the power of sin, to be possessed
   and governed by gifts and graces of an heavenly life, that men were
   then called to, as true Christianity. And the preachers of it bore
   witness, not to a thing that they had heard, but to a power of
   salvation, a renewal of nature, a birth of heaven, a sanctification of
   spirit, which they themselves had received. Gospel Christianity then
   stood upon its own true ground; it appeared to be what it was. And what
   was it? Why, it was an awakened divine life set up amongst men; itself
   was its own proof; it appealed to its proper judge, to the heart and
   conscience of man, which was alone capable of being touched with these
   offers of a new life.

   [Way-1-115] Hence it was, that sinners of all sorts, that felt the
   burden of their evil natures, were in a state of fitness to receive
   these glad tidings. Whilst the rigid Pharisee, the orthodox priest, and
   the rational heathen, though at enmity with one another, and each proud
   of his own distinction, yet all agreed in rejecting and abhorring a
   spiritual savior, that was to save them from their carnal selves, and
   the vanity of their own rational selfish virtues. But when, after a
   while, Christianity had lost its first glory, appeared no longer as a
   divine life awakened amongst men, and itself was no longer its own
   proof of the power and Spirit of God manifested in it; then heathenish
   learning, and temporal power, was from age to age forced to be called
   the glory and prosperity of the church of Christ; although in the
   Revelation of St. John, its figure is that of a scarlet whore riding
   upon the beast.

   [Way-1-116] Here therefore, my friend, you are to place the true
   distinction of gospel Christianity from all that went before it, or
   that is come up after it. It is purely and solely a divine life
   awakened, and set up amongst men, as the effect and fruit of Christ's
   glorification in heaven; and has no other promise from him but that of
   his Holy Spirit, to be with it, as its light, its guide, its strength,
   its comfort, and protection, to the end of the world. Therefore as
   gospel Christians, we belong to the new covenant of the Holy Spirit,
   which is the kingdom of God come down from heaven on the day of
   Pentecost; and therefore it is, that there is no possibility of seeing
   or entering into this new kingdom, but by being born again of the
   Spirit. The apostles and disciples of Christ, though they had been
   baptized with water, had followed Christ, heard his doctrines, and done
   wonders in his name; yet as then, stood only near to the kingdom of
   God, and preached it to be at hand. They had only seen and known Christ
   according to the flesh; had followed him with great zeal, but with
   little and very low knowledge either of him or his kingdom; and
   therefore it was, that they were commanded to stand still, and not act
   as his ministers in his new glorified state, till they were endued with
   power from on high: which power they then received, when the Holy Ghost
   with his cloven tongues of fire came down upon them, by which they
   became illuminated instruments, that were to diffuse the light of an
   heavenly kingdom over all the world. From that day began gospel
   Christianity, with its true distinction from everything that was before
   it; which was the ministration of the Spirit; and the ministers of it
   called the world to nothing but gifts and graces of the same Spirit, to
   look for nothing but spiritual blessings, to trust, and hope, and pray
   for nothing but the power of that Spirit, which was to be the one life
   and ruling Spirit of this newly opened kingdom of God. No one could
   join himself to them or have any part with them but by dying to the
   wisdom and light of the flesh, that he might live by the Spirit,
   through faith in Jesus Christ, who had thus called him to his kingdom
   and glory. Now this Christianity is its own proof; it can be proved
   from nothing but itself; it wants neither miracles, nor outward
   witness; but, like the sun, is only its own discoverer.

   [Way-1-117] He that adheres only to the history of the facts,
   doctrines, and institutions of the gospel, without being born of its
   Spirit, is only such a Christian, and is no nearer to Christ, than the
   Jew, who carnally adhered to the letter of the law. They both stand in
   the same distance from gospel Christianity.

   [Way-1-118] It is in vain therefore for the modern Christian, to appeal
   to antiquity, to history, and ancient churches, to prove that he
   belongs to Christ; for he can only belong to him, by having the power
   of Christ, and the Spirit of God living and dwelling in his renewed
   inward man.

   [Way-1-119] But a learned Christianity, supported and governed by
   reason, dispute, and criticism, that is forced to appeal to canons, and
   councils, and ancient usages, to defend itself, has lost its place,
   stands upon a fictitious ground, and shows, that it cannot appeal to
   itself, to its own works, which alone are the certain and only proofs
   either of a true, or a false Christianity.

   [Way-1-120] For the truth of Christianity is the Spirit of God living
   and working in it; and where this Spirit is not the life of it, there
   the outward form is but like the outward carcase of a departed soul.

   [Way-1-121] For the spiritual life is as much its own proof, as the
   natural life, and needs no outward, or foreign thing to bear witness to
   it. But if you please, gentlemen, we will end for this time, and refer
   what remains to the afternoon.

   The End of the First Dialogue
     __________________________________________________________________

   [Way-2-1] Academicus. I must take the liberty, gentlemen, of speaking
   first this afternoon; for though I have been much pleased with what
   passed betwixt Humanus and Theophilus in the morning, yet I must own to
   you all, that I was quite disappointed; for I came in full expectation
   of hearing everything, that I wish, and want to know, concerning Jacob
   Behmen, and his works. For though I have been reading, for more than
   two years, some one or other of his books, with the utmost attention,
   and I everywhere find the greatest truths of the gospel most
   fundamentally asserted, yet presently I am led into such depths, as I
   know not where I am, and talked to in such new, intricate, and
   unintelligible language, as seems quite impossible to be comprehended.
   Sometimes I almost suspect, that the author understood not himself: for
   I think, if I knew any truths, though ever so deep or uncommon; yet, if
   I understand them plainly myself, I could set them before others in the
   same plainness, that they appeared to me.

   [Way-2-2] All my acquaintance have the same complaint that I here make;
   but some hope, and others say, that if you live to publish any of his
   books, you will remove most of his strange and unintelligible words;
   and give us notes and explications of such as you don't alter. Surely a
   kind of commentary upon him, would reconcile many to the reading of
   him, who, in the state he is in, cannot have patience to puzzle their
   heads about him.

   [Way-2-3] Rusticus. Oh this impatient scholar! How many troubles do I
   escape, through the want of his learning? How much better does my old
   neighbor John the shepherd proceed? In winter evenings, when he comes
   out of the field, his own eyes being bad, the old woman his wife puts
   on her spectacles, and reads about an hour to him, sometimes out of the
   scriptures, and sometimes out of Jacob Behmen; for he has had two or
   three of his books some years. I sat by one evening, when my old dame,
   reading Jacob, had much ado to get on: "John," said I, "do you
   understand all this?" "Ah," says he, "God bless the heart of the dear
   man, I sometimes understand but little of him; and mayhap Betty does
   not always read right; but that little which I often do understand,
   does me so much good, that I love him where I don't understand him."

   [Way-2-4] "John," said I, "shall I bring a man to you, that knows the
   meaning of all of Jacob's hard words, and can make all his high matters
   as plain to you, as the plainest things in the world?" "No, no,"
   replied John, "I don't want such a man, to make a talking about Jacob's
   words; I had rather have but a little of his own, as it comes from him,
   than twenty times as much at second-hand. Madam, the squire's wife, of
   our town, hearing how Betty and I loved the scriptures, brought us, one
   day, a huge expounding book upon the New Testament; and told us, that
   we should understand the scripture a deal better, by reading it in that
   book, than the Testament alone. The next Lord's Day, when two or three
   neighbors, according to custom, came to sit with us in the evening;
   'Betty,' said I,'bring out madam's great book, and read the fifth
   chapter of St. Matthew.' When she had done that, I bid her read the
   fifteenth chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians. The next
   morning, said I to Betty, 'Carry his expounding book again to my
   mistress, and tell her, that the words of Christ, and his apostles, are
   best by themselves, and just as they left them.'

   [Way-2-5] "And, as I was that morning going to my sheep, thought I to
   myself, this great expounding book seems to have done just as much good
   to this little book of the Testament, by being added to it, and mixed
   with it, as a gallon of water would do to a little cup of true wine, by
   being added to it, or mixed with it. The wine indeed would be all
   there; but its fine taste, and cordial spirit, which it had, when drank
   by itself, would be all lost and drowned in the coldness and deadness
   of the water.

   [Way-2-6] "When my Betty used to read this, or some such words of
   Christ, 'Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of
   heaven'; she used to stop a little, that my heart might have time to be
   affected with them, to love the blessed thing there spoken of, and lift
   up itself to God in desire of it. But this great book takes this good
   work from my heart; and only calls upon my mind, to behold the many
   parts which the text may be split into, and the many meanings, some
   better and some worse, some higher and some lower, that every part has,
   and may be taken in, by some doctor of some church or other. Therefore,
   Rusticus, I sent the great book to madam again; and am, for the same
   reason, utterly against hearing your expounder of Jacob Behmen. If
   Jacob has more truths than other folks, he is the best able to tell me
   what they are; and if he has some matters too high for me, I don't
   desire any lesser man to make them lower.

   [Way-2-7] "When he, like an Elijah, in his fiery chariot, is caught up
   into such heights, and sees and relates such things, as I cannot yet
   comprehend; I love and reverence him for having been where I never was;
   and seeing such things as he cannot make me to see: just as I love and
   reverence St. Paul for having been caught up into the third heaven, and
   hearing and seeing things not possible to be uttered in human words.

   [Way-2-8] "As I have but one end in hearing the scriptures read to me,
   to fill me with the love of God, and every kind of goodness; so every
   part of scripture, whether plain or mysterious, does me the same good,
   is alike good to me, and kindles the same heavenly flame in my soul.
   Thus these plain words, 'Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly of heart;
   and ye shall find rest unto your souls'; give me, without any expounder
   of their meaning, such an aversion and dislike of all vanity and pride,
   fill me with such sweet contentment in every lowliness of life, that I
   long to be the servant of every human creature. On the other hand,
   these lofty words of scripture, 'Behold, a throne was set in heaven;
   and he that sat thereon, was, to look upon, like a jasper-stone; and
   there was a rainbow round about the throne; and four-and-twenty seats;
   and upon the seats, four-and-twenty elders in white raiment, and crowns
   of gold upon their heads: and out of the throne proceeded lightnings,
   and thunders, and voices: and before the throne were seven lamps of
   fire, which are the seven spirits of God: and before the throne there
   was a sea of glass like unto crystal: and in the midst of the throne,
   and round about it, were four beasts full of eyes before and behind:
   and the first beast was like a lion, the second like a calf, the third
   had a face as a man, and the fourth was like a flying eagle: and the
   four beasts had each of them six wings, and were full of eyes; and they
   rest not day and night, saying, Holy, holy, holy Lord God almighty,
   which was, and is, and is to come. And when these beasts give glory,
   and honor, and thanks, to him that sat on the throne, the
   four-and-twenty elders fall down before him that sat on the throne, and
   cast their crowns before the throne, saying, Thou are worthy, O Lord,
   to receive glory and honor, for thou hast created all things.'
   {Revelation, iv. ver. 2 }

   [Way-2-9] "Now these lofty and mysterious words, instead of puzzling my
   head, lay hold of my heart, which, all inflamed with them, rises up
   with the eyes and wings of the beasts in their song of praise and
   honor; and bows down with the elders that worship the high and mighty
   Lord of heaven and earth. And thus I want no Hebrew or Greek scholar to
   tell me this or that, what are the seven spirits of God, why four kinds
   of beasts, why neither more nor less than six wings, who were the
   elders, and why twenty-four; but the whole matter, as if a glance of
   the majesty of heaven had just passed by me, strikes my heart with such
   good transports of wonder and joy, as makes me all longing and desire
   to be one of those, who are always singing the praises and wonders of
   the majesty of God. And thus, Rusticus, all that the scriptures give me
   to drink, whether high or low, is equally a cup of blessing to me, and
   equally helps forward the growth of heaven in my soul.

   [Way-2-10] "Bring not therefore your cunning man, that has skill in
   words, to me; for words are but words; and though they be spoken even
   by the messengers of God, as angels, or prophets, or apostles; when
   they do their best, they can only do, as John the Baptist did, bear
   witness to the light: but the light itself, which can only give light
   to the soul, is God himself. And therefore not he that can best speak
   with the tongues of men and angels, but he that most loves God, that
   is, that most loves the goodness of the divine nature; he has most of
   God, and the light of God within him."

   [Way-2-11] Thus ended honest old John the shepherd. And now,
   Academicus, if your learned curiosity could be as much affected with
   what he has said, as my ignorant simplicity is, you would drop all that
   you had said, as the effect of such impatience as is much fitter to
   bring darkness than light into your soul. You own, that, in the works
   of Behmen, the greatest points of Christianity are most fundamentally
   opened. And how can you be more self-condemned, than by desiring more?

   [Way-2-12] But the truth is, you have only heard these fundamental
   matters; you have only received them as good notions; are content with
   the hearsay of them; and are therefore impatient to have more of this
   hearsay knowledge, that you may become more learned in high matters,
   and more able to talk about the ground and depth of Christian
   doctrines. You know, as well as I can tell you, that this is your joy
   in Jacob Behmen; and thence it is, that you have no patience, when you
   can't come at his meaning, so as to add it to your number of notions.
   And thus you forget how often he tells you, and how fundamentally he
   proves to you, that this notional knowledge, the treasure of human
   reason, is the very builder of Babel. Whilst you are under the guidance
   of our own Babylonian reason, you can have no good either from the
   scriptures, or the writings of Jacob Behmen; but will be hunting after
   notes and commentaries to help you to notions which only delude your
   mind with the empty shadows of knowledge. Would you know the truths of
   Jacob Behmen, you must see that you stand where he stood; you must
   begin where he began, and seek only, as he tells you he did, the heart
   of God, that he might be saved from the wrath of sin and Satan; and
   then it was, that the light of God broke in upon him. But you, full of
   the power of your own reason, want to stand upon the top of his ladder,
   without the trouble of beginning at the bottom, and going up step by
   step. But I believe you had rather have Theophilus speak than me; and
   therefore I shall now leave you to him.

   [Way-2-13] Theophilus. Truly, Academicus, I am much of the same mind
   with honest Rusticus, though perhaps I might not have spoken it so
   bluntly as he has done. You seem to be in the same error, that most of
   my learned friends are in, with regard to Jacob Behmen, who, though
   they greatly admire him, yet, of all people, receive the least true
   benefit from him. They have been trained up in dispute and controversy,
   accustomed to determine everything by the light of their own reason,
   and know no other guide to truth. And therefore, till, sooner or later,
   they come to know the falseness of this guide, they can have no
   entrance into the region of divine light; but must be forced to take
   their part, not of truth, but of some such system of opinions, as their
   birth and education has placed them in. Thus, a learned Papist has one
   creed, and the learned Protestant has another; not because truth and
   light has helped him to it; but because birth and education have given
   to the one popish, to the other Protestant eyes. For reason, which is
   the eye or light of both, finds as much to its purpose, and as many
   good tools to work with, in popish, as in Protestant opinions. Learning
   and criticism are an open field to both, and he only has the greatest
   harvest, who is best skilled in reaping.

   [Way-2-14] Academicus. I perceive then, that I must renounce all my
   learning and reason, if I am to understand Jacob Behmen. I cannot say,
   that I am resolved to purchase it at so great a price. I hope the
   knowledge to be had from the scriptures, will be sufficient for me,
   without his deep matters. I did not expect to find you so great an
   enemy to learning.

   [Way-2-15] Theophilus. Dear Academicus, be not so uneasy; I am no more
   an enemy to learning, than I am to that art which builds mills to grind
   our corn, and houses for ourselves to dwell in. I esteem the liberal
   arts and sciences as the noblest of human things; I desire no man to
   dislike or renounce his skill in ancient or modern languages; his
   knowledge of medals, pictures, paintings, history, geography, or
   chronology; I have no more dislike of these things in themselves, than
   of the art of throwing silk, or making lace. But then all these things
   are to stand in their proper places, and everyone kept within its own
   sphere.

   [Way-2-16] Now all this circle of science and arts, whether liberal or
   mechanic, belongs solely to the natural man; they are the work of his
   natural powers and faculties; and the most wicked, sensual, unjust
   person, who regards neither God, nor man, may yet be one of the ablest
   proficients in any or all of them. But now Christian redemption is
   quite of another nature; it has no affinity to any of these arts or
   sciences; it belongs not to the outward natural man, but is purely for
   the sake of an inward, heavenly nature, that was lost, or put to death,
   in paradise, and buried under the flesh and blood of the earthly,
   natural man. It breathes a spark of life into this inward, hidden, or
   lost man; by which it feels and finds itself, and rises up in new
   awakened desires after its lost Father, and native country.

   [Way-2-17] This is Christian redemption; on the one side, it is the
   heavenly divine life offering itself again to the inward man, that had
   lost it. On the other side, it is the hope, the faith, and desire of
   this inward man, hungering, and thirsting, stretching after, and
   calling upon this divine and heavenly life.

   [Way-2-18] Now, whether this awakened, new man breathes forth his faith
   and hope towards this divine life, in Hebrew, Greek, or English sounds,
   or in no one of them, can be of no significancy: a man that can do it
   only in one, or in all these languages, is neither farther from, nor
   nearer to, this redeeming life of God. Or can you think, that the
   heavenly life must more willingly enter into, and open itself in, a man
   that has many languages, than in him, who knows only one? Or, that a
   man, who can make high Dutch, Welsh, or Greek grammars, must have a
   stronger faith, a more lively hope, and a more continual thirst after
   God, than he who can but poorly spell in his mother tongue? But now, if
   this is too absurd to be supposed; then, my friend, without the least
   injury done, or the least enmity shown, to learning, science, reason,
   and criticism, you must place them just where I have done, amongst the
   things and ornaments of this earthly life, and such things as, in their
   own nature, are as easy to be had, and as highly enjoyed, by men that
   despise all goodness, as by those who fear God, and eschew evil.

   [Way-2-19] And therefore, sir, no truths concerning the divine and
   heavenly life are to be brought for trial before this learned bar,
   where both jury and judges are born and bred, live and move and have
   their being, in another world, which have no more power of feeling the
   divine life, than an eagle's eyes can look into the kingdom of God. If
   you, my friend, having read many old Greek and Latin books, should
   intend to publish Homer, or Caesar's Commentaries, with critical notes,
   I should have nothing to object to your ability; you might be as well
   qualified by such means for such a work, as one man is to make baskets,
   or another traps to catch flies. But if, because of this skill in old
   Greek and Latin, you should seem to yourself, or others, to be well
   qualified to write notes upon the spirit and meaning of the words of
   Christ, I should tell you, that your undertaking was quite unnatural,
   and as impossible to be free from error, as when a blind man undertakes
   to set forth the beauty of different colors.

   [Way-2-20] For the doctrines of redemption belong no more to the
   natural man, than the beauty of colors to him, that never saw the
   light. And from this unnatural procedure it is, that the scriptures are
   as useful to the Socinian or Arian, the papist or the Protestant; and
   they can as easily, by the light of reason, charge one another with
   absurdities, and confute each other's opinion, as two blind men can
   quarrel and reject each other's notions of red and green.

   [Way-2-21] Jesus Christ is the light of that heavenly man that died in
   paradise; and therefore nothing in man, but that awakened seed of life,
   that died in paradise, can have the least sensibility or capacity for
   receiving the redeeming power of Jesus Christ. But light and life have
   no dependence upon words or phrases; they both can only proceed from a
   birth, whether it be the light and life of God, or the light and life
   of this world. How absurd would it be, to suppose, that a man,
   naturally blind, must be taught grammar or logic, to fit him for the
   reception of the light of the sun, and the knowledge of colors? Yet not
   less absurd, than to think, that skill in Hebrew and Greek words can
   open the light of God and heaven in the soul. If you now, Academicus,
   can set this matter in a juster light, I am ready to hear you.

   [Way-2-22] Academicus. Standing upon the ground, that you, Theophilus,
   stand upon, all that you have said of reason, science, historical
   knowledge, or critical skill in words, is unanswerable. For what can
   all these things avail, if redemption is purely a birth of the divine
   nature, light, and Spirit of God, offered to fallen man; which birth
   can only be received by the faith, hope, and desire of that inward man,
   which is divine in us? For nothing else can have any hunger or thirst
   after the divine nature, but that which is itself born of it.

   [Way-2-23] Now this true ground of the Christian redemption gives the
   greatest glory to God and comfort to man. It explains the fact, why
   plain and simple souls, having their inward man kindled into love,
   hope, and faith in God, are capable of the highest divine illumination;
   whilst learned students, full of art and science, can live and die
   without the least true knowledge of God and Christ, and slaves to all
   the lusts of the flesh. For thus, this redemption belongs only to one
   sort of people, and yet is common to all. It is equally near, and
   equally open, to every son of man. There is no difference between
   learned and unlearned, between Jew or Greek, male or female, Scythian
   or barbarian, bond or free; but the same Lord is God over all, and
   equally nigh to all that call upon him. It is told us, as the glory of
   the divine goodness, that "it giveth fodder to the cattle; and feedeth
   the young ravens that cry unto it." What cattle? Surely not only to the
   cattle of Jacob; or only to the young ravens that cry in the land of
   Judah. Yet this would be much more consistent with the goodness of the
   one universal God, than to hold, that only the sons of Jacob, or the
   children of the circumcision, were in the covenant of God's redemption.

   [Way-2-24] But now, though this one ground of Christian redemption
   stands in the highest degree of plainness from scripture, and is
   absolutely certain from the very nature of the thing; yet, till I met
   with honest Rusticus, I never conversed with any man, or read any book,
   that gave me the least hint of it. When I had taken my degrees, I
   consulted several great divines, to put me in a method of studying
   divinity. Had I said to them, "Sirs what must I do to be saved?" they
   would have prescribed hellebore to me, or directed me to the physician
   as a vapored enthusiast. And yet I am now fully satisfied, that this
   one question ought to be the sole enquiry of him, who desires to be a
   true divine. And was our savior himself on earth, who surely could do
   more for me, than all the libraries in the world; yet I need have asked
   no more divinity-knowledge of him, than is contained in the one
   question.

   [Way-2-25] It would take up near half a day, to tell you the work which
   my learned friends have cut out for me. One told me, that Hebrew words
   are all; that they must be read without points; and then the Old
   Testament is an opened book. He recommended to me a cart load of
   lexicons, critics, and commentators, upon the Hebrew Bible. Another
   tells me, the Greek Bible is the best; that it corrects the Hebrew in
   many places; and refers me to a large number of books learnedly writ in
   defense of it. Another tells me, that church history is the main
   matter; that I must begin with the first fathers, and follow them
   through every age of the church, not forgetting to take the lives of
   the Roman emperors along with me, as striking great light into the
   state of the church in their times. Then I must have recourse to all
   the councils held, and the canons made, in every age which would enable
   me to see with my own eyes the great corruptions of the Council of
   Trent. Another, who is not very fond of ancient matters, but wholly
   bent upon rational Christianity, tells me, I need go no higher than the
   reformation; that Calvin and Cranmer were very great men; that
   Chillingworth and Locke ought always to lie upon my table; that I must
   get an entire set of those learned volumes wrote against popery in King
   James's reign; and also be well versed in all the discourses which Mr.
   Boyle's and Lady Moyer's lectures have produced: and then, says he, you
   will be a match for our greatest enemies, which are the popish priests,
   and modern Deists. My tutor is very liturgical; he desires me, of all
   things to get all the collections that I can of the ancient liturgies,
   and all the authors that treat of such matters; who, he says, are very
   learned, and very numerous. He has been many years making observations
   upon them, and is now clear, as to the time, when certain little
   particles got entrance into the liturgies, and others were by degrees
   dropped. He has a friend abroad, in search of ancient manuscript
   liturgies; for, by the bye, said he, at parting, I have some suspicion
   that our sacrament of the Lord's Supper is essentially defective, for
   want of having a little water in the wine. Another learned friend tells
   me, the Clementine Constitutions is the book of books; and that all
   that lies loose and scattered in the New Testament, stands there in its
   true order and form; and though he won't say, that Dr. Clarke and Mr.
   Whiston are in the right; yet it might be useful to me to read all the
   Arian and Socinian writers, provided I stood upon my guard, and did it
   with caution. The last person I consulted, advised me to get all the
   histories of the rise and progress of heresies, and of the lives and
   characters of heretics. These histories, he said, contract the matter;
   bring truth and error close in view; and I should find all that
   collected in a few pages, which would have cost me some years to have
   got together. He also desired me to be well versed in all the
   casuistical writers, and chief schoolmen; for they debate matters to
   the bottom; dissect every virtue, and every vice, into its many degrees
   and parts; and show, how near they can come to one another without
   touching. And this knowledge, he said, might be useful to me, when I
   came to be a parish priest.

   [Way-2-26] Following the advice of all these counselors, as well as I
   could, I lighted my candle early in the morning, and put it out late at
   night. In this labor I had been sweating for some years, till Rusticus,
   at my first acquaintance with him, seeing my way of life, said to me,
   "Had you lived about seventeen hundred years ago, you had stood just in
   the same place as I stand now. I cannot read; and therefore," says he,
   "all these hundreds of thousands of disputing books, and doctrine
   books, which these seventeen hundred years have produced, stand not in
   my way; they are the same thing to me, as if they had never been. And
   had you lived at the time mentioned, you had just escaped them all, as
   I do now; because, though you are a very good reader, there was then
   none of them to be read.

   [Way-2-27] "Could you therefore, be content to be one of the primitive
   Christians, who were as good as any that have been since; you may spare
   all this labor. Take only the gospel into your hands; deny yourself;
   renounce the lusts of the flesh; set your affections on things above;
   call upon God for his Holy Spirit; walk by faith, and not by sight;
   adore the holy Deity of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in whose image and
   likeness you was at first created; and in whose name and power you have
   been baptized, to be again the living likeness, and holy habitation, of
   his life, and light, and Holy Spirit.

   [Way-2-28] "Look up to Christ, as your redeemer, your regenerator, your
   second Adam; look at him, as truly he is, the wisdom and power of God,
   sitting at his right hand in heaven, giving forth gifts unto men;
   governing, sanctifying, teaching, and enlightening with his Holy
   Spirit, all those that are spiritually-minded; who live in faith, and
   hope, and prayer, to be redeemed from the nature and power of this evil
   world. Follow but this simple, plain spirit of the gospel, loving God
   with all your heart, and your neighbor as yourself; and then you are
   Christ's disciple, and have his authority to let the dead bury their
   dead.

   [Way-2-29] "God is a spirit, in whom you live and move and have your
   being; and he stays not till you are a great scholar, but till you turn
   from evil, and love goodness, to manifest his holy presence, power, and
   life, within you. It is the love of goodness, that must do all for you;
   this is the art of arts; and when this is the ruling spirit of your
   heart, then Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, will come unto you, and make
   their abode with you, and lead you into all truth, though you knew no
   more books than I do."

   [Way-2-30] So ended Rusticus. It is not easy for me, Theophilus, to
   tell you, how much good I received from this simple instruction of
   honest Master Rusticus; for master I may well call him, since he, in so
   few words, taught me a better lesson of wisdom, than ever I had heard
   before.

   [Way-2-31] What a project was it, to be grasping after the knowledge of
   all the opinions, doctrines, disputes, heresies, schisms, councils,
   canons, alterations, additions, inventions, corruptions, reformations,
   sects, and churches, which 1700 years had brought forth through all the
   extent of the Christian world! What a project this, in order to be a
   divine, that is, in order to bear true witness to the power of Christ,
   as a deliverer from the evil of flesh, and blood, and hell, and death,
   and a raiser of a new birth and life from above! For as this is the
   divine work of Christ, so he only is a true and able divine, that can
   bear a faithful testimony to this divine work of Christ.

   [Way-2-32] How easy was it for me to have seen with Rusticus, that all
   this labyrinth of learned enquiry into such a dark, thorny wilderness
   of notions, facts, and opinions, could signify no more to me now, to my
   own salvation, to my interest in Christ, and obtaining the Holy Spirit
   of God, than if I had lived before it had any beginning! But the blind
   appetite of learning gave me no leisure to apprehend so plain a truth.
   Books of divinity indeed I have not done with; but I will esteem none
   to be such, but those that make known to my heart the inward power and
   redemption of Jesus Christ. Nor will I seek for anything even from such
   books, but that which I ask of God in prayer; viz., how better to know,
   more to abhor and resist the evil that is in my own nature; and how to
   attain a supernatural birth of the divine life brought forth in me: all
   besides this is pushpin. The shipwrecked man wants only to get to
   shore. Did we see the truth of our state as he does, we should have but
   one want, and that would be, to get possession of our first created
   state. There is no misery but in the evil that is in our own fallen
   state; this is our shipwreck, and great distress; nor is there any
   happiness, but in having the first life of God, and all goodness,
   opened again in the soul. He that is not intent upon this one thing
   needful, is not a wise Christian, much less a divine, or one qualified
   to make known to others the mystery of the power of Christ in the work
   of redemption.

   [Way-2-33] But now I go back to that which I first spoke of; and though
   I give up all that I said of putting out Jacob Behmen in new language,
   with comments. yet I must still desire, that, some way or other, he may
   be made more plain and intelligible; call it by what name you please.

   [Way-2-34] Theophilus. Jacob Behmen may be considered, (1.) as a
   teacher of the true ground of the Christian religion. (2.) As a
   discoverer of the false anti-Christian church, from its first rise in
   Cain, through every age of the world, to its present state in all and
   every sect of the present divided Christendom. (3.) As a guide to the
   truth of all the mysteries of the kingdom of God. In these three
   respects, which contain all that anyone can possibly want to know or
   learn from any teacher; he is the strongest, the plainest, the most
   open, intelligible, awakening, convincing writer, that ever was. As to
   all these three matters, he speaks to everyone, as himself saith, in
   the sound of a trumpet. And here to pretend to be an explainer of him,
   or make him fitter for our apprehension, in these great matters, is as
   vain, as if a man should pipe through a straw, to make the sound of a
   trumpet better heard by us.

   [Way-2-35] Further, he may be considered, (4.) as a relater of depths
   opened in himself, of wonders which his spirit had seen and felt in his
   ternario sancto. Now in this respect he is no teacher, nor his reader a
   learner; but all that he saith is only for the same end as St. Paul
   spoke of his having been in the third heaven, and hearing things not
   possible to be spoken in human words. And yet in these matters it is,
   that most of his readers, especially if they are scholars, are chiefly
   employed; everyone in his way trying to become masters of them. Thus,
   when he first appeared in English, many persons of this nation, of the
   greatest wit and abilities, became his readers; who, instead of
   entering into his one only design, which was their own regeneration
   from an earthly to an heavenly life, turned chemists, and set up
   furnaces to regenerate metals, in search of the philosopher's stone.
   And yet, of all men in the world, no one has so deeply, and from so
   true a ground, laid open the exceeding vanity of such labor, and utter
   impossibility of success in it from any art or skill in the use of
   fire. And this must with truth be affirmed of him, that there is not
   any possible error, that you can fall into in the use of his books, but
   what he gives you notice of beforehand, and warns you against it in the
   most solemn manner; and tells you, that the blame must be yours, if you
   fall into it. Neither is there any question that you can put, nor
   advice or direction that you can ask, but what he has over and over
   spoke to; telling you, in the plainest manner, what the mystery is
   which his books contain; how, and by whom, and for what end, they are
   to be read.

   [Way-2-36] There are two sorts of people to whom he forbids the use of
   his books, as uncapable of any benefit from them, and who will rather
   receive hurt, than any good from them. The first sort he shows in these
   words: "Loving reader, if thou lovest the vanity of the flesh still,
   and art not in an earnest purpose of the way to the new birth,
   intending to be a new man, then leave the above-written words in these
   prayers unnamed, or else they will turn to a judgment of God in thee."*
   {*Repent. p. 42} Again, "Reader, I admonish you sincerely, if you be
   not in the way of the prodigal, or lost son, returning to his father
   again, that you leave my book, and read it not; it will do you harm.
   But if you will not take warning, I will be guiltless; blame nobody but
   yourself." {**Three Prin.}

   [Way-2-37] In this advice, so different from that of other writers, he
   shows the truth and reality of his own regenerated state; and that the
   very same spirit speaks in him, as formerly said, "Repent, for the
   kingdom of heaven is at hand. Unless a man deny himself, and forsake
   all that he hath, he cannot be my disciple. No man can come unto me,
   except the Father draweth him. Except a man be born again from above,
   he cannot see the kingdom of God. He that is of God, heareth God's
   word. Come unto me, all ye that labor, are weary and heavy-laden." For
   all these texts of scripture say that very self-same thing that Jacob
   Behmen doth, when he absolutely requires his reader to be in the way of
   the returning prodigal. It is not rules of morality observed, or an
   outward blameless form of life, that will do: for pride, vanity, envy,
   self-love, and love of the world, can be, and often are, the heart of
   such a morality of life. But the state of the lost son is quite another
   thing; and must be the state of every man: as soon as he comes to
   himself, and has seeing eyes, he will then, like him, see himself far
   from home; that he has lost his first paradise, his heavenly Father,
   and the dignity of his first birth; that he is a poor, beggarly slave
   in a foreign land, hungry, ragged, and starving, amongst the lowest
   kind of beasts, not so well fed and clothed as they are: when thus
   finding himself, he saith, "I will arise, and go to my Father," then
   has he his first fitness for the mysteries opened in Jacob Behmen's
   writings; for they are addressed to man only in this supposed state;
   they have no fitness to him but in this state; and therefore no one,
   whether Jew, Christian, or Deist, who does not find and feel himself to
   be the very lost son described in the parable, has any capacity to
   receive benefit from them, but they will be a continual stumbling block
   to him. And it is just thus with the gospel itself; wherever it is
   received and professed, without something of this preparation of heart,
   without this sensibility of the lost son, there it can only be a stone
   of stumbling, and help the earthly man to form a religion of notions
   and opinions from the unfelt meaning of the letter of the gospel.

   [Way-2-38] Secondly, the other sort of people, whom he excludes from
   his books, and for whom he has writ nothing, are the men of reason, who
   give themselves up to the light of reason, as the true touchstone of
   divine truths. To these he declares over and over, that he has not his
   light from reason; and that he writes nothing to reason. "The rational
   man," saith he, "understands nothing in reference to God; for it is
   without and not in God." Again, "The true understanding must flow from
   the inward ground, out of the living Word of God. In which inward
   ground, all my knowledge concerning the divine and natural ground, hath
   taken its rise, beginning, and understanding. I am not born of the
   school of this world, and am a plain simple man; but by God's Spirit
   and will am brought, without my own purpose and desire, into divine
   knowledge in high natural searchings."* {*Epist. p. 121.} Again, "He
   that will learn to understand the true way, let him depart from and
   forsake his own reason." {**p. 138} "If my writings," says he, "come
   into your hands, I would that you should look upon them as of a
   child's, in whom the highest has driven his work; for there is that
   couched therein, which no reason may understand or comprehend." {Ibid.
   p. 141.} Again, "Reason must be blinded, kept under, and not allowed to
   stir."* {*p. 68.} Again, "Reason must yield up its own hearing and
   life, and give itself up to God, that God may live in the understanding
   of man, else there is no finding in the divine wisdom. All that is
   taught and spoken concerning God, without the Spirit of God, is but
   Babel." {**Epist. p. 9} Again, "We must wholly reject our own reason;
   it is not available to help us to the light, but is a mere leading
   astray, and keeping us back. This we intimate to the reader, that he
   may know what he readeth. Let none account it for a work of outward
   reason." Again, "Speaking of the mystery, {Three-fold L. p. 68,88.} he
   saith, "pray to God the most high, that he would be pleased to open the
   door of knowledge, without which no man will understand my writings;
   for they surpass the astral reason; they apprehend and comprehend the
   divine birth; and therefore only the like spirit can understand them
   aright. No reasoning or speculating reacheth them, unless the mind be
   illuminated from God, to the finding of which the way is faithfully
   shown to the seeking reader."* {*Epist. p. 138}

   [Way-2-39] And now, Academicus, you may see how needless it is to ask
   me, or anyone else, to help you to understand his works: he himself has
   given you all the assistance that can be given: he has laid open before
   you, in the utmost plainness, both the nature of the mystery, and the
   one only possible way that you can partake of it.

   [Way-2-40] Academicus. You speak often of the mystery: pray, what am I
   to understand by it?

   [Way-2-41] Theophilus. You are to understand by it, the deep and true
   ground of all things. A mystery, in which the birth and beginning of
   eternal nature, or the first workings of the inconceivable God, opening
   and manifesting his hidden triune Deity in an outward state of glory in
   the splendor of united fire, light, and spirit, all kindled and
   distinguished, all united and beatified by the hidden three. In this
   eternal nature, all inward powers, all the hidden riches of the
   incomprehensible Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are from eternity to
   eternity brought forth into outward majesty, and visible glory. In
   which triune opening of heavenly glory, power, and majesty, the triune
   God beholdeth himself as in his own manifestation, is clothed as with
   his own garment, dwelleth as in his own habitation, and worketh all his
   wonders of wisdom and omnipotence in and by, and according to, the
   possible powers of this eternal nature. For this eternal nature is the
   first possibility of all after-beings and things; for before, or
   without, this eternal nature, all is an eternal, silent, still,
   unmovable, unperceivable nothingness; and this eternal nature is the
   first manifestation, the first opening of the divine omnipotence; and
   in it are included, in its own infinite bounds, all the height and
   depth, and extent, of the divine wisdom and powers. All that God is,
   and can do, or bring forth from himself, is done in and by the working
   of his triune spirit in this eternal nature.

   [Way-2-42] This is the great scene of his eternal wisdom and
   omnipotence, in which new wonders are eternally rising up, and
   declaring the fathomless depths of the riches of the invisible triune
   Deity. And to say, that God can do no more, than what he can do through
   and by the possible powers of this eternal nature, is only saying, that
   he can do more than what he can do by himself, because this eternal
   nature is the eternal manifestation of the total God, or an out-birth
   of that which the Deity is, in its invisible power and Deity.

   [Way-2-43] Out of this transcendent eternal nature, which is as
   universal and immense as the Deity itself, do all the highest beings,
   cherubims and seraphims, all the hosts of angels, and all intelligent
   spirits, receive their birth, existence, substance, and form. They are
   all so many different, finite, bounded forms of the heavenly fire, and
   light of eternal nature, into which creaturely beings the invisible
   triune God breatheth his invisible Spirit, by which they become both
   the true children and likeness of the invisible Deity, and also the
   true offspring of his eternal nature; and are fitted to rejoice with
   God, to live in the life of God, and live and work, and have their
   being, in that eternal nature, or kingdom of heaven, in which the Deity
   itself liveth and worketh. And they are one, united in one, God in
   them, and they in God, according to the prayer of Christ for his
   disciples; that they, and he, and his holy Father, might be united in
   one.* {*John xvi.}

   [Way-2-44] This is in part what you are first to understand concerning
   the mystery.

   [Way-2-45] But, secondly, it is a mystery, in which the creation and
   fall of angels, with all its consequences in them, and their kingdom;
   in which the system of this visible universe, why, and from what, and
   how it came to be as it is; the birth of the sun and the planets, why
   and how they come to have such difference in nature, place, and office,
   as also of all the stars; the nature of every creaturely life, and
   ground of its vast variety; the cause of every inanimate dead thing; a
   mystery in which the creation, dignity, and perfection, of the first
   angelic man in paradise; the whole kingdom of nature, and kingdom of
   grace; their connection, difference, and mutually affecting and working
   upon one another under the providence of the invisible Spirit of God,
   from the beginning to the end of time, are all unfolded from their
   first root and cause.

   [Way-2-46] Thirdly, it is a mystery, in which the ground of Christian
   redemption, its whole nature, absolute necessity, and the working of
   all its parts both in the redeemer and in the redeemed, are set forth
   in the utmost degree of clearness; where the whole process of Christ,
   as incarnate, living, suffering, dying, rising from the dead, ascending
   into heaven, and sitting at the right hand of God, and governing his
   church on earth by his Holy Spirit; and all the practical duties of the
   gospel, whether of faith and hope, or of self-denial; dying to this
   world, and strict conformity to the life and Spirit of Christ; are all
   demonstrated from the deepest ground of the nature of things, to be
   absolutely necessary to the recovery and redemption of the fallen human
   nature.

   [Way-2-47] This, sir, is, in some degree, the mystery which it has
   pleased the Spirit of God to open in this plain and unlearned man.

   [Way-2-48] Academicus. Well, Theophilus, I entirely consent to this
   account you have given of it, and think it is sufficiently supported by
   what is to be found in his books; they seem to mean all these great
   matters which you mentioned. But then, sir, give me leave to tell you,
   that I think it is impossible for you to defend what you have said
   above concerning reason; or to show the unreasonableness of my
   demanding rational illustrations and comments. For if this is the
   truth, that his works contain the ground and philosophy of nature, and
   all creatures; surely they must not only allow the use of our reason,
   but call for the highest and most acute exercise of it. For what can
   enter into the reasons and philosophy of things, but reason? Or what do
   all these great matters appeal to, but to our reason? I see no
   possibility of denying this; and if this be granted, all that has been
   said about silencing our reason, must be given up.

   [Way-2-49] Theophilus. The conclusion, my friend, that you here think
   to be so just and strong, as not possible to be denied, is so far from
   being so, that it is a glaring absurdity; and the quite contrary to
   that one only true conclusion, which you should have made, and which so
   easily and naturally flowed from what was said. For if the mystery is
   the deep ground of all things, of all nature, and all creatures. then
   the one conclusion that infallibly flows from it, is this, that no
   acuteness or ability of natural reason can so much as look into it. For
   natural reason is no older than flesh and blood; it has no higher a
   nature or birth than natural doubting; it had no existence when nature
   began its first workings, and therefore can bear no witness to them. It
   was not present, had no eyes, when things first came forth; it never
   stood in the center, from whence the birth of everything must arise; it
   never saw the forming of the first seeds of every life: and yet the
   mystery, you see, contains all this: and therefore the one plain and
   necessary conclusion is this; that natural reason is, and must be, as
   incapable of entering into this mystery, as flesh and blood is
   incapable of entering into the kingdom of heaven.

   [Way-2-50] Behold, now, what a flagrant proof you have given of the
   vanity, weakness, and blindness of natural reason in divine matters.
   Your reason saw, with the utmost certainty, that the mystery must be an
   appeal to reason, merely because it contained such an height and depth
   of a divine philosophy; and yet the height and depth of its matters is
   the one full proof, that reason can have nothing to do with it. This
   may show you by what means Babel has built itself all over the
   Christian world. For, by the light of this Babylonian reason, the
   defenders and opposers of doctrines confute one another with such a
   certainty and strength of reason, as you saw, that reason must be the
   only judge of the mystery, from which it is just as much excluded by
   its own nature, as the mole under ground is, by its nature, excluded
   from the flight and sight of the towering eagle.

   [Way-2-51] Academicus. Pray then tell me, how a man is to attain the
   knowledge of the mystery, or have any share in the light of it.

   [Way-2-52] Theophilus. There is but one possible way, and that is this:
   it must be born in you. All true knowledge, either of God or nature,
   must be born in you. You cannot possibly know anything of God, but so
   far as God is manifested in you; so far as his light and Holy Spirit is
   born in you, as it is born in him, and liveth and worketh in you, as it
   liveth and worketh in him. A distant, absent, separate God, is an
   unknown God. For God can only manifest God, as light can only manifest
   light, and darkness make darkness to be known.

   [Way-2-53] Again, you can have no real knowledge of nature, and its
   inward working power, but so far as the workings of nature, and the
   birth of things, are a working and birth in yourself. Natural reason
   may trade in the outside of things; it may measure, and make drafts of
   magnitude, height, and distance of things on the earth, and above the
   earth; it may make many and fine experiments of the powers of every
   element: but then this is going no farther into the ground of nature,
   than when the potter makes curious vessels with his clay and fire.

   [Way-2-54] To count the stars, to observe their places or motions, is
   just the same height of natural knowledge, as when the shepherd counts
   his sheep, and observes their time of breeding.

   [Way-2-55] This world, with all its stars, elements, and creatures, is
   come out of the invisible world; it has not the smallest thing, or the
   smallest quality of anything, but what is come forth from thence; and
   therefore every quality of everything is what it is, and worketh that
   which worketh, by a secret power and nature in and from the invisible
   world. Bitter, sweet, sour, hard, soft, hot, cold. have all of them
   their first seed and birth in the invisible world, called eternal
   nature. The irrational animals of this world feel all these things: the
   rational man goes farther; he can reason and dispute about their
   outward causes and effects: but the mystery of eternal nature must
   first be opened in man, before he can give the divine philosophy of
   them. For as they all come from thence, have their nature, birth, and
   growth, from thence; so no philosophy, but that which comes from
   thence, can give the true ground of them.

   [Way-2-56] If man himself was not all these three things, viz., (1.) a
   birth of the holy Deity; (2.) a birth of eternal nature; and, (3.) also
   a microcosm of all this great outward world; that is, of everything in
   it, its stars and elements; and if the properties of every creaturely
   life were not in an hidden birth in him; no omnipotence of God could
   open the knowledge of divine and natural things in him.

   [Way-2-57] For God can only manifest that, which there is to be
   manifested; and therefore only open that, which before lay unopened,
   and as in a state of hiddenness or death. Nothing can come forth from
   man, or any creature, but that which first had its seed in him; and to
   think, that any knowledge can be put into him, but that which is a
   birth of his own life, is as absurd as to think, that the tree and its
   branches may first grow, and then be brought to the root.

   [Way-2-58] We are led into mistakes about this matter from the common
   practice of the world, which calls everything knowledge, that the
   reason, wit, or humor of man prompts him to discourse about; whether it
   be fiction, conjecture, report, history, criticism, rhetoric, or
   oratory: all this passes for sterling knowledge; whereas it is only the
   activity of reason, playing with its own empty notions.

   [Way-2-59] From this idea of knowledge it is, that when this rational
   man turns his thoughts to the study of divinity, he is content with the
   same knowledge of divine matters, as he had in these exercises of his
   reason; and he proceeds in the same manner, as when he studied history
   and rhetoric.

   [Way-2-60] He turns his mind to hearsay, to conjecture, to criticism,
   and great names; and thinks he is then a member of the true church,
   when he knows it as plainly as he knows the ancient commonwealth of
   Rome. His knowledge of the being of God stands upon the same bottom,
   and is made known to him by the same means and methods of proof, as he
   comes to be assured, that once upon a time there was a first man, and
   his name was Adam. His knowledge of the kingdom of heaven is looked
   upon to be sufficient, as soon as he knows it, as he knows that there
   is such a place as Constantinople. When he turns his inquiries into the
   mysteries of Christian redemption, he looks as much out of himself as
   when he is searching into the antiquities of Greece; and appeals to the
   same helps for his knowledge, as when he wants to know the inward
   structure of Solomon's temple, and all its services.

   [Way-2-61] This is the great delusion which has long overspread the
   Christian world; and all countries, and all libraries, are the proof of
   it. It is this power and dominion of reason in religious matters, that
   Jacob Behmen so justly calls the anti-Christ in Babel; for it leads men
   from the life and truth of the mysteries of Christ, to put a carnal
   trust in a confused multitude of contrary notions, inventions, and
   opinions. And the thing is unavoidable, it cannot be otherwise with
   reason; it cannot do more good with, or make a better use of, gospel
   doctrines; it is anti-Christ as soon as ever it is admitted to debate
   and state the nature of any divine truth. And that for these two great
   reasons: first, because it has absolutely the same incapacity for it,
   as the man that is born blind hath for the light. Wherein now lieth the
   incapacity of the blind man, to speak or think anything truly about
   light? It is because he is born and bred in another world, where
   nothing of light ever did or can enter; it is because there is the gulf
   of a whole birth betwixt him and the light of this world; and
   therefore, though he lives ever so long, reasons ever so much, or hears
   ever so many speeches, about the light, all that he gets by it is only
   more false ideas of the unknown thing.

   [Way-2-62] Now this is strictly the incapacity of reason, to speak, or
   think anything truly of the divine life. It is because it is born and
   bred in another world, in the darkness of flesh and blood, into which
   no perception or sensibility of God and heaven can enter; it is because
   there is the gulf of a whole birth betwixt it, and the light of God and
   heaven; and therefore, let reason, from age to age, hear, read, and
   dispute ever so much about the light of God and heaven, all that it can
   get by it, is only to be enriched with more and more fictions and
   falsities about the unknown thing.

   [Way-2-63] Secondly, natural reason, whenever judging or ruling in
   divine matters, must be anti-Christ, because it cannot make any other
   use of the mysteries of religion, or do anything else with them, but in
   the same spirit, and for the same ends, that it receiveth and useth the
   things of this world. It matters not, what are the names or natures of
   the things, whether you call them spiritual or temporal: natural reason
   can make but one and the same use of them; it can only turn them to an
   earthly use, to worldly prosperity, to private interest, honor, power,
   or distinction. And the thing is unavoidable, it is impossible to be
   otherwise; it is not a fault that reason might amend, if it would; but
   is as much its own nature, as it is natural to flame to ascend. Now
   everything must act according to its nature; every kind of life must be
   for itself, for its own good. Now reason has no higher a birth and
   nature, than the spirit of this world; it must be as worldly as its
   birth is, and cannot possibly have anything else but worldly views, and
   the interests of its own flesh and blood, in everything that it can
   make any use of. This is as essential to the natural reason of man, as
   to the natural subtlety of every beast; for they have both the same
   original from the light and life of this world, have both the same
   earthly nature, and can act only in an earthly manner, to serve the
   same ends of an earthly life. The reason of the one has no more of God
   and the divine nature in it, than the subtlety of the other. And hence
   it is, that man, following only the cunning of his natural reason, is
   often more mischievous than the worst of beasts. And thus, you see how
   reason, ruling in divine things, is and must be anti-Christ: first, as
   it turns the living mysteries of God into lifeless ideas, and vain
   opinions; and, secondly, as it sets up a worldly kingdom of strife,
   hatred, envy, division, and persecution, in defense of them. And
   therefore it is a fundamental truth, that man has no capacity for
   divine knowledge, till the particle of divine life, lost in the fall,
   is awakened; in which alone, the mystery of God and the divine nature
   can have a birth.

   [Way-2-64] Academicus. You have carried your point, Theophilus, with a
   high hand, and I rejoice in seeing this matter so well proved. But
   still I would ask you something, that I know not how to express; I
   would fain understand more clearly, how this mystery of God, and
   eternal nature, is to be born in me.

   [Way-2-65] Theophilus. Everything, Academicus, is, and must be, its own
   proof; and can only be known from and by itself. There is no knowledge
   of anything, but where the thing itself is, and is found, and
   possessed. Life, and every kind and degree of life, is only known by
   life; and so far as life reaches, so far is there knowledge, and no
   farther. Whatever knowledge you can get by the searching and working of
   your own active reason, is only like that knowledge, which you may be
   said to have got, when you have searched for a needle in a load of
   straw, till you have found it.

   [Way-2-66] For nothing that is brought into the mind from without, or
   is only an idea beheld by our reasoning faculty, is any more our
   knowledge, than the seeing our natural face in a glass, is seeing our
   own selves. And all the ideas or images that your reason can form of
   any absent, unpossessed thing, is no more a part of your own knowledge,
   than your drawing a picture of your own hand is making a member of your
   own body. It is therefore a vain and fruitless inquiry, to be asking
   beforehand for the knowledge of any unpossessed matters; for knowledge
   can only be yours, as sickness and health is yours, not conveyed into
   you by a hearsay notion, but the fruit of your own perception and
   sensibility of that which you are, and that which you have in yourself.
   How often have you been warned against this procedure, in words like
   these? "Therefore let the reader be warned not to dive farther into
   these very deep writings, nor plunge his will deeper, than so far as he
   apprehendeth: he should always rest satisfied with his apprehension for
   in his apprehension, he standeth yet in that which hath its reality;
   and therefore he erreth not, how deep soever the Spirit leadeth him:
   for to one more will be given than to another. And this is the only
   mark to be observed, that every one continue steadfast in humility
   towards God, and submit himself, that he may make the will and the deed
   as he pleaseth. When you do that, you are in yourself as dead; for you
   desire nothing but God's will, and the will of God is your life, which
   goeth inward even to the opening of the highest mysteries."*
   {*Threefold L. p. 158.}

   [Way-2-67] One would have thought, Academicus, that this advice, if
   only from the uncommon nature of it, should have had more effect upon
   you. For it is not only new to you, but to every reader; there being
   nothing like it, either for the sense, the sobriety, or the depth of
   its matter, ever given by the wisest of philosophers to their readers.

   [Way-2-68] Truth, my friend, whatever you may think of it, is no less
   than the savior and redeemer of the world.

   [Way-2-69] Hear therefore its own language: "If any man will be my
   disciple, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and come after
   me." He does not say, "Let him get a clear and distinct idea of me,
   what, and how I am God and man in the unity of my person"; he only
   tells him what he is to part with, what he must put off, to be made a
   child of the light. Search and look where you will, this denial of self
   is the one only possible way to the truth. For nothing has separated us
   from truth, nothing stands betwixt us and truth, but this self of an
   earthly life, which is not from God, but from our wandering out of our
   first created state.

   [Way-2-70] God created us in and for the light; and had Adam kept his
   first state, he had not been an ignorant, blind pilgrim in the darkness
   of this world, but the illustrious opener of all its wonders in the
   light of God. But as this light and knowledge was lost in Adam, so it
   can only be recovered by him who came to restore all that was lost, and
   who justly called himself the light of the world. Would you therefore
   be a disciple of truth, you must not, with Pilate, ask, "What is
   truth?" or consult the schools, how you shall form an idea of it: but
   you must alter your life, put a stop to all earthly lusts, renounce all
   that you are, and have from self; give up all the workings of your own
   reason, and your own will; and then, and then only, are you fitted for
   that unction from above which can teach you all things. But till
   Christ, who is the one fountain of life and light, be opened in you; it
   is in vain, that you rise up early, and late take rest, in quest of
   truth; for he himself hath said, "Without me, ye can do nothing." And
   every son of earthly Adam, however naturally enriched with the spirit,
   and light, and arts of this world, is born, and must remain, a spirit
   in prison, till Christ is found to be an inward preacher, and light
   within him. As he is the one resurrection from the dead, so is he the
   one deliverer from everything that has the nature of death, darkness,
   and ignorance. And to expect seeing eyes, hearing ears, and sensibility
   of heart, from anything but that eternal Word, by which we were at
   first made, is robbing God and Christ of more honor, is a more
   idolatrous departure from the true worship and dependence upon him,
   than if we sometimes hoped to have good from this or that saint's
   praying for us. For this is a truth, that admits of no restriction, but
   reaches from one end of the earth to the other, that as no man can come
   unto the Father, but through the Son; so no one can come at any divine
   knowledge either in grace or nature, but through him alone.

   [Way-2-71] The schools of this world are of no higher a nature, than
   the markets of this world; and, when rightly used, serve only to the
   end of this earthly life. But as markets and traffic seldom keep within
   their just bounds, but become serviceable to vanity, earthly lusts, and
   all the luxury of life; so it mostly happens in our learned labors; we
   grow old, and blear-eyed, in studies that nourish pride and envy,
   division and contention; and only help our old man to be content with
   the riches of his fallen nature, and feel no necessity of being born
   again.

   [Way-2-72] Would you therefore be a divine philosopher, you must be a
   true Christian; for darkness is everywhere, but in the kingdom of God,
   and truth nowhere to be found by man, but in a new birth from above.
   Man was created in and for the truth; that is, he was created in the
   truth of the divine light, to see and hear, to taste and feel, to find
   and enjoy all things in the truth of the divine life brought forth in
   him. And therefore it is, that for fallen man there is but one remedy;
   it is only the truth that can make him free. Truth is the one only
   resting-place of the soul; it is its atonement and peace with God; all
   is, and must be, disquiet, a succession of lying vanities, till the
   soul is again in the truth, in which God at first created it. And
   therefore said the Truth, "Learn of me; for I am meek, and lowly of
   heart; and ye shall find rest unto your souls."

   [Way-2-73] Academicus. Pray, Theophilus, stop a while: surely your zeal
   carries you too far. All ages of the world have seemed to agree in
   this, that the gospel teaches purely the simplicity of a godly life;
   calls no man to be a philosopher, nor gives the smallest instruction in
   matters that relate to philosophy.

   [Way-2-74] Theophilus. All this, Academicus, is very true; but then,
   this very simplicity and plainness of the gospel, turning man only from
   this world, to a faith, and hope, and desire of God, is the one reason,
   and full proof, that it alone is a true guide into the highest school
   of divine wisdom and philosophy; not only because goodness is our
   greatest wisdom, but because the mysteries of God, of grace, of nature,
   of time and eternity, can no other possible way be opened in man, but
   by this simplicity of a godly life taught in the gospel; because only
   the godly life hath knowledge of God; just as the creaturely life hath
   only knowledge of the creature, and the painful life hath knowledge of
   pain. The scripture saith, "that only the Spirit of God knoweth the
   things of God." And indeed, how can it possibly be otherwise? For since
   the Spirit of God is the spirit and life that goeth through all nature
   and creature, and only openeth its own hidden powers therein; since it
   is that which is the former of everything; that which makes everything
   to have the life that it hath, and to work as it worketh; nothing but
   the Spirit of God can possibly know the things of God: and therefore,
   of necessity, this Spirit of God must be in man, and work in man, as it
   is in nature, and worketh in nature, before man can enter into the
   knowledge and working of God in nature. And therefore here you have two
   immutable, and fundamental truths: (1.) that all our ignorance of God
   and nature is, and must be, purely and solely, the want of the Spirit
   and life of God in us: and, (2.) that therefore the one only way to
   divine knowledge is the way of the gospel, which calls and leads us to
   a new birth of the divine nature brought forth in us.

   [Way-2-75] Academicus. I have nothing that I can, or would, object to
   what you have said. But still I must say, that I do not enough
   apprehend how the Spirit and life of God must thus, of all necessity,
   be born in us; nor, indeed, do I entirely comprehend how it is done.
   Human reason, or human instruction, I see plain enough, cannot help me
   to any divine light. But suppose God should send an angel to instruct
   me, and that frequently, would not divine knowledge be then imparted to
   me? And yet this would not be a birth of God in me. Or, will you say,
   that God cannot sufficiently instruct me, even by the highest of his
   angels?

   [Way-2-76] Theophilus. An angel, sir, may instruct you, as the
   scriptures instruct you; but it is only such an instruction, as may
   direct you where and how to obtain that light, which neither the letter
   of scripture, nor the voice of an angel, can bring forth in you. The
   highest angel neither hath, nor ever can have, any more of a redeeming
   power in it, than the dead paper on which the scriptures are written.
   But you are to observe, and mark it well, that you cannot have divine
   light from any other thing, but that which hath full power to redeem
   you: for light is not only life, but the perfection, and highest state
   of it; and therefore nothing can bring forth light, but that which can
   bring forth the truth and perfection of life.

   [Way-2-77] Every other thing, besides the life and light of God, stands
   only in a state of ministerial service towards you: whether it be words
   of message from God, written on paper, engraven on tables of stone, or
   spoken by the mouth of an angel, a prophet, or apostle; be it what it
   will, it is only a creaturely thing; and its creaturely service can
   rise no higher, nor go any farther, than to show the true way to him,
   who only himself can be the truth, the life, and the light in you. For
   the light of God cannot, even by God himself, be communicated to you by
   any creature; and the reason is, because the light of God is God
   himself: it is the light of his own life: and therefore only himself
   can bring it forth wherever it is; and no creature can possibly partake
   of his light, but by having a birth in and from the divine nature: for
   the light of God can never be separate from the divine nature, or be
   anywhere but where the divine birth is. And thus you fully see, that
   all that can be divinely known, either in heaven, or on earth, can only
   be known in that one way, and by that one means, by which fallen man
   can be saved; namely, by a new birth of the light and Spirit of God
   within us. And therefore the simple way of the gospel is the one only
   way to attain all the knowledge of all that, which can be known of God
   and nature: for nothing can manifest God and nature, but the Spirit of
   God working in man, as he worketh in nature, which can only be done by
   a new birth of the divine nature, brought forth in man: but when man is
   thus born again of God, then the life and Spirit of God is in him, and
   worketh in him, as it doth in nature. And thus it is, that man can only
   be a divine philosopher, when Christ, who is the light of God, and the
   light of nature, is revealed in him. Then he is in that living Word,
   and that living Word is in him, by which all things were at first made;
   and which maketh, createth, and worketh in him, as it worketh in all
   things, both in heaven and earth.

   [Way-2-78] Academicus. I never expected to have seen the gospel new
   birth proved to be the only gate to all that divine knowledge which any
   son of Adam ever had, or can have. But you have proved it to be so,
   beyond all possibility of denial. And I now only want to have you go on
   in this doctrine of the new birth; for I am persuaded, you can still
   add something to that, which has already been said upon it, both as to
   the ground, and nature, and fruits of it.

   [Way-2-79] Theophilus. You must remember, Academicus, that all that I
   can by discourse, from the beginning to the end of this matter, do for
   you, amounts only to thus much: it is like giving you a full assurance
   of a wonderful pearl of glorious virtues, hidden in the ground of a
   certain field, and showing you every step of the way you must take to
   find it. Now, if from month to month, you should be inquiring and
   hearing of some new powers and virtues of this heavenly pearl; what
   good does all this discourse and hearsay do you? You are just as far
   from the pearl itself, and have no more of it, than when you first
   heard of it; and would be in the same distance from it, though you was
   always, to the end of your life, loving to hear and talk about it. I
   have had no other end in all that is said of the new birth, but to
   assure you of the truth of the thing, and the true way to it. Now the
   way to the new birth lies wholly in your will to it; and every step
   that you can take, consists in a continual dying to that selfish
   corrupt will, which you have from flesh and blood. Nothing can make any
   change in you, but the change of your will. For everything, be it what
   it will, is a birth of that will, which worketh in you. You have
   nothing therefore to enquire after, nor anything that you can judge of
   yourself by, but the state of your mind, the working of your will and
   desire. These will give you more light than all the men or books in the
   world can give you: where these are, there are you; and what these are,
   that are you: there you live, and to that you belong; and there you
   must have all the good or evil that can be called yours.

   [Way-2-80] For nothing leads or carries you anywhere, nothing generates
   either life or death in you, but the working of your mind, will, and
   desire. If your will is angelic, you are an angel, and angelic
   happiness must be yours. If your will is with God, you work with God;
   God is then the life of your soul, and you will have your life with God
   to all eternity. If you follow an earthly will, every step you take is
   a departure from God, till you become as incapable of God, and the life
   of God, as the animals of this world. If your will worketh in pride and
   self-exaltation, in envy and wrath, in hatred and ill will, in deceit,
   hypocrisy, and falseness, you work with the devil, you are generating
   his nature within you, and making yourself ready for the kingdom of
   hell. And thus it is, that our works follow us; and that everyone will
   be rewarded according to his works; and none can reap anything else but
   that which he hath sown. And the seed of everything that can grow in
   us, is our will. The will maketh the beginning, the middle, and the end
   of everything; it is the only workman in nature; and everything is its
   work. It has all power; its works cannot be hindered; it carries all
   before it; it creates as it goes; and all things are possible to it. It
   enters wherever it wills, and finds everything that it seeks; for its
   seeking is its finding. The will overrules all nature, because nature
   is its offspring, and born of it; for all the properties of nature,
   whether they be good or evil, in darkness or in light, in love or in
   hatred, in wrath or in meekness, in pride or humility, in trouble or
   joy, are all of them the offspring or birth of the will; as that
   liveth, so they live; and as that changeth, so they change. So that
   whatever you are, or whatever you feel, is all owing to the working and
   creating power of your own will. This is your God or your devil, your
   heaven or your hell; and you have only so much of one, or the other, as
   your will, which is the first mover, is either given up to the one, or
   to the other.

   [Way-2-81] For where the will of man is not, there he hath nothing; and
   where his will is, there is all that something, which he hath, be it of
   what kind it will; and it is inseparable from him, till his will
   worketh contrary to it.

   [Way-2-82] Academicus. Whence hath the will of man this mighty power,
   that it can have nothing, but that which itself hath willed?

   [Way-2-83] Theophilus. You might as well ask, why a circle must be
   perfectly round, or a straight line free from every degree of
   crookedness. For as it is not a circle till it is perfectly round, nor
   a straight line till it is free from crookedness; so the will is not in
   being, but so far as it is free, is its own mover, and can have nothing
   but that which it willeth. Secondly, the will is not a made thing,
   which is made out of something, or that came out of some different
   state, into the state of a will. But the free will of man is a true and
   real birth from the free, eternal, uncreated will of God, which willed
   to have a creaturely offspring of itself, or to see itself in a
   creaturely state. And therefore the will of man hath the nature of
   divine freedom; hath the nature of eternity, and the nature of
   omnipotence in it; because it is what it is, and hath what it hath, as
   a spark, a ray, a genuine birth of the eternal, free, omnipotent will
   of God. And therefore, as the will of God is superior to, and ruleth
   over all nature; so the will of man, derived from the will of God, is
   superior to, and ruleth over all his own nature. And thence it is, that
   as to itself, and so far as its own nature reacheth, it hath the
   freedom and omnipotence of that will from which it is descended; and
   can have or receive nothing, but what itself doth, and worketh, in and
   to itself.

   [Way-2-84] And herein consisteth the infinite goodness of God, in the
   birth of all intelligent creatures; and also the exceeding height,
   perfection, and happiness of their created state: they are descended
   from God, full of divine power; they can will and work with God, and
   partake of the divine happiness. They can receive no injustice, hurt,
   or violence, either from nature or creature; but must be only that,
   which they generate, and have no evil or hurt, but that which they do
   in and to themselves. All things stand in the will, and everything
   animate or inanimate is the effect and produce of that will, which
   worketh in it, and formeth it to be that which it is. And every will,
   wherever found, is the birth and effect of some antecedent will; for
   will can only proceed from will, till you come to the first working
   will, which is God himself.

   [Way-2-85] And here, my friend, you have an easy entrance into the true
   meaning of many important passages in the books of Jacob Behmen, like
   those that follow: "All," says he, "is magical; the eternity is
   magical: Magic is the mother of all things. I speak from a magic
   ground. Here the reader must have magical eyes. This hath a magical
   understanding." Vulgar reason is offended at these expressions, because
   the word "magic" has, for many ages, been mostly used in a bad sense.
   But don't you be frighted at the sound of these words; they are not
   only innocent, but truly good and wise, and deeply founded on the truth
   of things. They have the most Christian and divine meaning; are
   strictly conformable to the spirit of the gospel, as shall be shown by
   and by; and are used for the best of ends; namely, to open the true
   ground of eternal and temporal nature, and the birth of creatures in
   each of them. They are to show how the hidden, invisible Deity acteth
   and worketh all its wonders in both these worlds, in one and the same
   uniform way; as also, how everything in religion, whether it be a
   mystery of God, a grace of God, or a duty of man, hath its whole
   ground, and nature and efficacy, therein.

   [Way-2-86] Now magic power meaneth nothing but the working of the will,
   whether it be the divine, or the creaturely will; and everything that
   is the work of the will, and is produced by it, is called its magic
   work, which only means, that it is generated by and from the will, as a
   birth brought forth by it. The will is the workman, and the work is
   that, which it bringeth forth out of itself. So that by these words you
   are always to understand these two things, the working, and the work of
   the will. And now, you may already sufficiently see, that their meaning
   is not only innocent and good, but as necessarily, and divinely, to be
   ascribed to God, as the power of bringing things into existence by the
   working of his will. For here you have the true ground and original of
   the creating power of God; how everything that is not God; is yet come
   from him, and out of him, as so many births of his invisible power,
   breaking forth into visibility, and sensible qualities of an outward
   life.

   [Way-2-87] The first manifestation of the invisible God, is that which
   is called, and is, eternal nature; which is the eternity of all
   possible powers and qualities of life, the first source of every
   natural power that can be in any creature. All these qualities of life,
   in their eternal birth, and rising from one another by the working will
   of God, are the outbirth, or outward glory of God, in which he
   manifests his triune, invisible Deity in a threefold life of fire,
   light, and spirit, which are the ground of all the qualities of life,
   sensibility, power, and spirit, that ever were, or can be found in any
   creature. Everything that exists, or thinks, or moves, or finds itself
   in any kind or degree of sensibility, is from, and out of, this glassy
   sea of these united powers of life. And this whole manifestation of all
   the possible powers, and perfection of life and glory, is called that
   kingdom of heaven, in which God dwelleth; and is, as it were, his
   divine workhouse, out of which he is perpetually giving forth new
   works, and forms of wonder.

   [Way-2-88] This manifestation of God is a magic birth from the triune
   working will of the hidden Deity, which willed to see itself in this
   opened, outward show of all the possible powers of life and glory; and
   from whence new worlds of finite divine beings, as so many living
   images of God, might have a possibility of coming forth. For without
   nature, God must be by himself, and continue an unmanifested God. For
   no form or creature can be, unless there be something antecedent to it,
   that can be formed. Life must be, before there can be any finite living
   creatures; just as light must be, before there can be any seeing eyes.
   And therefore the manifestation of God in an outward glory of all the
   possible powers, qualities, perfections of life, called eternal nature,
   must be, or there could be no possibility for the existence of any
   creature.

   [Way-2-89] Now this same working will of the triune Deity, which
   manifested itself in an eternal nature, manifesteth itself in
   creaturely forms, all generated from, all enlivened and animated with,
   that same trinity of fire, light, and spirit, that constitutes eternal
   nature. So that all intelligent creatures are that in their finite
   being, which eternal nature is in its infinite state. And thus all of
   them are from God, and from heaven, live in God, and may work with God,
   as God is in heaven, and heaven in him; one life, one power, one will,
   and one happiness with God.

   [Way-2-90] Now everything that is not God, but after him, and distinct
   from him, must be that which it is, from the working will of the Deity.
   For since it cometh into being, only because it is willed to be, it can
   have nothing in it, or be any other thing, but that which the working
   or creating will brought forth. And as all things began in and from
   this working will; so all things must go on in it; and there can be no
   other creator, worker, or former of things to all eternity, but the
   working will of God, either mediately or immediately. Nor can there be
   any other nature in anything, but that which is the birth, or magic
   effect, of a working will within it. And everything that is done by the
   creature, everything which it seeks and likes, or abhors and resists,
   is all driven on by a working will, or magic power, which stirs, and
   generates, and works within it.

   [Way-2-91] Would you know now the true ground of all this? It is this:
   it is because will is the first original of all power, and the
   omnipotence of God consisteth in nothing else but his working will; and
   therefore no power ever was, or ever can be, anywhere else, but as it
   is in God, and if the creature hath any power, it must have it, as God
   hath it, in the working will. For since all nature, with all its
   qualities, births, and creatures, are all brought into being by the
   working will of God; it evidently follows, that every creature, with
   every quality, power, and property in it, is magically born, and
   therefore must have a magic nature, that is, a nature that cometh from,
   and standeth in, a working will.

   [Way-2-92] And now, sir, you are come into a full view of the most
   important matter of the mystery of all things; a matter which, if
   rightly apprehended in the inward ground of your soul, puts an entire
   end to all the jargon of a false philosophy, and to all those fictions
   of doctrines and disputes, which reason has built upon the written Word
   of God.

   [Way-2-93] For nothing is effected by fiction and invention, by any
   contrived arts or searchings of rational inquiries; all this is
   nothing, because it toucheth not nature, but leaveth it to itself;
   which carrieth on its own works by its own power, and can only work in
   its own way; and must bring forth its own births independent of
   everything but its own working life. But all lieth in the will and
   working desire of the soul, because will began and brought forth all
   that nature that lives in the soul, and is the only life in it; and
   this life can work and grow from nothing else, but that which first
   brought it forth. Hence you see the full meaning of these words of our
   author, "All is magical and that magic is the mother of all things,"
   and consequently, the only opener of all divine knowledge. All which
   expressions only imply thus much, that the will, whether in God, or the
   creature, is the ground and seed of everything; is the generating
   working power, which maketh and worketh all things to be in that state
   and condition which they are; and that everything begins, goes on, and
   ends, in the working of the will; and that nothing can be otherwise,
   than as its will worketh; and therefore eternity and time is magical;
   and magic is, and must be, the mother of all things.

   [Way-2-94] Now here you see, in the utmost degree of clearness, how all
   true and false religion divide from one another. For if nothing worketh
   but the will, if nothing else carries on the work of nature; then all
   is false and vain in religion but the working of the will; and nothing
   is saving, or redeeming the life of the soul, but that which helps the
   will to work towards God.

   [Way-2-95] Hence it is, that our author so often tells his reader, that
   when he sees and finds this magic birth of things, he is "delivered
   from Babel"; not by running from one place to another, or from one
   system of opinions to another, but by inwardly leaving all the workings
   of the earthly self, all the paper buildings of natural reason, and
   turning to God with the whole will and working desire of his heart.
   This is the right coming out of our own Babel of vain opinions into the
   truth and reality of nature, where the living God of nature is found;
   not in notions, but in the living working of the soul, and worshiped in
   spirit and in truth.

   [Way-2-96] I said, into the truth and reality of nature, because nature
   is the standard of truth, and all is Babel but that which worketh with
   nature, that is, with eternal nature; for as eternal nature is the
   manifestation of the unchangeable God, so it must be as unchangeable in
   itself, and its own workings, as God is; because it hath nothing in it,
   but what is in and from the unchangeable God. And therefore, God cannot
   be manifest, or work in any creature, but as he is manifest, and
   worketh in eternal nature; and therefore all that the creature doth is
   labor lost, and a vain beating of the air, but that which it worketh
   with, and according to eternal nature. Because God never was, nor ever
   can be, or be found, anywhere else but in his own heaven, or eternal
   nature. And no soul can by any one possible thing find, or be found by
   God, but by standing before him in the same will and working as eternal
   nature doth. And therefore all is fiction and Babel but the working of
   the will, because nothing but the will can work with nature; and that
   for this reason, because all life, and all nature, eternal and
   temporal, is what it is, merely and solely, from the working of the
   will. All things in heaven and in earth stand in this magic birth; and
   nothing can change its state, either for better or worse, but as the
   working of its will changes. Justly therefore is it said, that where
   this truth is found, there is a full and true deliverance from Babel;
   that is, from all strife, and zeal, and division about opinions, sects,
   and churches; since the one thing that works either to life, or to
   death, the one thing that alone opens heaven or hell for us, is with
   every individual man in every place, and in every age of the world; and
   that one thing is the working of the will. And when, in any such man,
   his will is turned from his own earthly self, and this earthly life and
   worketh with its desire to God, then all these sayings of the scripture
   are true of him; viz., that he is redeemed from this evil world--that
   he has his conversation in heaven--that he is of God, and heareth God's
   Word--that he is saved by faith--that Christ is revealed in him--that
   he is Christ's, and Christ is his--that Christ is in him of a
   truth--and that he is led by the Spirit of Christ. All these texts
   would be true of him, though he had never seen, nor heard, a syllable
   of the written Word of God.

   [Way-2-97] For the Word of God which saveth and redeemeth, which giveth
   life and light to the soul, is not the word printed on paper, but is
   that eternal, ever-speaking Word, which is the Son of God, who in the
   beginning was with God, and was the God by whom all things were made.
   This is the universal teacher and enlightener of all that are in
   heaven, and on earth, who from the beginning to the end of time,
   without respect of persons, stands at the door of every heart of man,
   speaking into it not human words, but divine goodness; calling and
   knocking, not with outward sounds, but by the inward stirring of an
   awakened divine life. And therefore, as sure as that is true, which St.
   John saith, that this eternal Word "is the light of men, and the light
   that lighteth every man that cometh into the world," so sure is it,
   that our savior and salvation, our teacher and enlightener, from whom
   we have every good thought, is Christ within us; not within this or
   that man, but in every man wherever born, and in whom the light of life
   ariseth. And indeed how can it be otherwise? For if God is the God of
   all men; and the Word of God the life and light of all men; and all men
   are capable of goodness; and all goodness can only be from God; and no
   goodness can belong to man, but that which is within him; then every
   man must have the Word, or Christ of God within him, and can have it
   nowhere else. All teachers therefore, who teach men to look for life or
   salvation in anything but from the Word and Spirit of God within them,
   stand chargeable with the blood and death of souls; because, in all the
   possibility of things, nothing can overcome that death which is in the
   soul, but the Word, or Christ of God living and working in it. For,
   observe, man must have goodness in the same way as God hath goodness,
   that is, from the divine nature; for goodness is nowhere else, neither
   is anything else capable of it; and therefore, if goodness is to be in
   man, the divine nature must, of all necessity, be first brought to life
   within him. But this cannot be, till the working will of our heart
   turns and gives up itself wholly to the Word and Spirit of God within
   us. For we can have nothing but that, towards which the earnestness of
   our will goeth.

   [Way-2-98] Again, see here in a still higher degree of proof the
   absolute necessity, and unspeakable benefit, of the spirit of prayer;
   how it does, and must, in spite of all opposition, raise the fallen
   soul out of the poverty of flesh and blood, into the riches of an
   heavenly nature brought forth in it. For since all things in heaven and
   earth stand in a magic birth, or working of the will; the will is that,
   which hath all power; it unites all that is united in heaven or on
   earth; it divides and separates all that is divided in nature; it makes
   heaven, and it makes hell; for there is no hell, but where the will of
   the creature is turned from God; nor any heaven, but where the will of
   the creature worketh with God. Therefore, as we pray, so we are; and as
   our will-spirit secretly worketh, so are we either swallowed up in the
   vanity of time, or called forth into the riches of eternity. And
   therefore the spirit of prayer is most justly conceived, and most
   simply expressed, when it is said to be the rising of the soul out of
   the vanity of time into the riches of eternity: for all the vanity
   which the soul hath, is from its living in, and loving the things of
   time; and therefore it can only come out of the vanity of its state, by
   loving and living in the truths, which are the riches of eternity: for
   the spirit of prayer is the hunger of the soul; and as every hunger is,
   so it eats; it always eateth that which it hungereth after, and hath a
   life suitable to the nature, state, and condition, both of its hunger,
   and its food. If it hungereth after the things of flesh and blood, it
   eateth nothing else, and only groweth in the bestial life; and of the
   flesh must reap the corruption that belongs to flesh: and if it
   hungereth after God, it eateth the food which giveth life to the
   angels; it eateth the bread that is come down from heaven; namely, the
   real heavenly body and blood of Christ, which surely may be called the
   riches of eternity.

   [Way-2-99] All the mysteries of religion, and the necessity of the
   whole process of Christ in our redemption, have all of them their
   ground, and necessity, and efficacy, in this magic nature of things,
   and are all of them only for this one end; to help fallen man to have a
   working will towards that first life, which he has lost. And therefore
   no one joins with the mysteries of redemption, or can have any share in
   them, but he whose will turns wholly from this world, and hath all its
   workings towards God and heaven. And now, sir, see the plain, and easy,
   and certain deliverance from all perplexity and vain labor in the
   disputes and divisions of religion. It is but opening your natural
   eyes, that is, letting simple nature work with its own power, and all
   difficulties are removed; and the way to God and goodness is as
   natural, and as free from all perplexity, as the opening our eyes to
   see the light of the sun. For what is so natural to man as the working
   of the will? And yet he can have nothing, or be anything, different
   from that, to which his will worketh.

   [Way-2-100] Nor does this at all too much exalt the human will, or make
   our salvation not to be the pure grace and gift of God to us, but quite
   the contrary. For the will here spoken of, is not the will of flesh and
   blood, but that heavenly will, which is the only spark of the Deity in
   us, given by the free grace of God to all mankind, as soon as fallen,
   and called in scripture the inspoken Word of God in paradise; which was
   the beginning of the redemption, when God first entered into a covenant
   of salvation with Adam, and all his posterity. This inspoken Word is
   Christ, or the spark of the divine nature, which is the light that
   lighteth every man that cometh into the world. And here, in this Christ
   in us, lieth the will that hath the power of salvation in it; and all
   its salvation is the salvation of Christ. For it is the will of this
   heavenly nature, hid in every man, that is the working will, that
   bringeth forth the new birth of heaven in us; and therefore is the pure
   free salvation of Christ, given to be a redeemer within us. So that all
   our salvation, though wrought out by this working will within us, is,
   from the beginning to the end, the pure grace of God to us, and no
   salvation of our own.

   [Way-2-101] And thus, sir, you see, that every soul of man is partly
   human, and partly divine; and is united to an earthly and an heavenly
   nature; and so not only can, but must, always work either with one or
   the other, and has nothing else to work with; and must and can be, or
   have nothing else, but as he followeth or worketh with either of these
   wills. So that, infallibly to know both your present and future state,
   what you are, and to what you belong, you need only to see, what you
   cannot help seeing, how, and where, and to what, your will worketh.

   [Way-2-102] And thus, from this knowledge of the magic nature of
   things, which all are that which they are, solely from the working of
   the will in everything, you are delivered from all vain labor and party
   zeal; and are brought back to that pure and safe ground, on which God
   has placed you to work out your own salvation, without any hindrance
   from any builders of Babel, of whatever denomination.

   [Way-2-103] The short is this: the whole matter of religion relates
   only to life and death. But life and death are both of them immutable,
   and founded in the unchangeable nature of things. Nothing can alter
   them, or invent a new way, either to or from either of them. To what
   purpose then, is all this dividing into so many parties? Why all this
   strife and zeal about opinions? Death and life go on their way, carry
   on their own work, and stay for no opinions. Does the stone stop, or
   alter its tendency towards the earth? Do the sparks and flame cease to
   fly upwards, because philosophers dispute and quarrel about the reasons
   of one or the other? No; nature goes on in its own way, let reason say
   what it will. Now death and life have their own unchangeable nature and
   working in and from themselves; and are just as distinct from, and
   independent of, all opinions of men about them, as the things just now
   mentioned: so that to will and work, as life willeth and worketh, and
   to will and work, as death willeth and worketh, is the one only
   possible way to partake either of life or death. What a delusion is it
   therefore, to grow grey headed in balancing ancient and modern
   opinions; to waste the precious uncertain fire of life in critical
   zeal, and verbal animosities; when nothing but the kindling of our
   working will into a faith, that overcometh the world, into a steadfast
   hope, and ever -burning love, and desire of the divine life, can hinder
   us from falling into eternal death!

   [Way-2-104] Academicus. Oh! Theophilus, you have led me into a depth,
   that I never thought of seeing into.

   [Way-2-105] For this magic power of everything, that works in all
   nature and creature, shows me everything in a new view. You might well
   say, that reason has no power in this mystery; that nothing is proposed
   to it: for since life and death have their own working within
   themselves, and must at last, when time is at an end, divide and take
   possession of everything, according as its will has worked either with
   one or the other, it signifies no more to them what reason has been all
   this time discoursing about, than in what language a man used to talk.
   But before you go any farther, I beg a word or two on these matters.
   First, how I am to understand our author, when he says, "Here the
   reader must have magical eyes"; and, "This or that hath a magical
   understanding." And, secondly, that you would, as you promised, show,
   how the speaking thus of this magical power of life, is strictly
   conformable to the spirit of the gospel.

   [Way-2-106] Theophilus. As to your first matter, concerning magical
   eyes; I should have thought the thing plain enough already. But you may
   understand it thus. When a carpenter cuts timber into various shapes
   and forms, and then joins one piece to another, till it is formed into
   the shape of a house; this is no magical work, because one part does
   not grow from the other, till the whole is brought forth, and therefore
   there is no need of magical eyes to see what this work is. But when an
   oak groweth from an acorn, or a plant from a seed in the ground, here
   the work is magical; that is, it is a birth or product generated from
   the working will in the acorn and seed, from whence the stem, and all
   its branches and fruits, grow forth; which working will continueth till
   the plant or tree hath reached its limit, that is, till the working
   will in the seed hath spent itself. Now all this is a magical work, and
   therefore can only be seen by such magical eyes as can see into the
   beginning, and go on with the working of that which works and generates
   in the tree or plant.

   [Way-2-107] As to your other matter, how this language of the magical
   working of the will is entirely conformable to the spirit of the
   gospel; the answer is easy, because the thing is plain. For the first
   possible beginning of the Christian life, is, by the founder of it,
   expressly laid in a new birth from above, and therefore plainly
   declared to be a magical work, and to have no other nature; because a
   generating work, and a magical work, are only different expressions for
   the same thing. And as the beginning, so every following advancement in
   the Christian life, is as really and truly only a growth of life, or
   magical birth from the powers of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, upon the
   working will in the soul, as the plant, from its first stirring in the
   seed, to its last state, is only a growth from the powers of the sun,
   stars, and elements, upon the working will in the seed.

   [Way-2-108] Everything that is outward in religion, whether it be men
   or things, planting or watering, is only for the sake of this inward
   birth; either to direct man to it, to help him to work in it, or warn
   him of that eternal death, which the will, working according to flesh
   and blood, must inherit as its own genuine fruit. And whoever fancies
   the Christian life to be anything else than a birth growing up in God,
   till it comes to the perfection of the divine life, by the same way of
   a gradual growth from the seed, has not a syllable in the gospel, nor
   an instance in nature, to plead in excuse of his fanciful error.

   [Way-2-109] For nothing worketh in all nature or grace, but what
   worketh as a birth, or magical growth of life. For nothing can come
   from the living God but life, nor for any other end, but to manifest
   some kind or degree of life. There are no dead forms, or lifeless
   inventions to be found, till you come to the mechanic works of men's
   hands, and the cobweb schemes of dead knowledge, brought forth by human
   reason. For reason is the old serpent called subtlety, the first and
   the last grand deceiver of mankind, that takes them from the powerful
   workings of nature, to follow the shadows of empty sounds, till all is
   swallowed up either by final life or death, which will at last reap
   everything into its own unchangeable barn.

   [Way-2-110] Again, faith and hope, and love and desire towards God, are
   the only gospel means of bringing forth the new birth; and therefore
   all that the gospel requires, is a magical working of the will.

   [Way-2-111] For all these powers, whether of faith, hope, love, and
   desire towards God and the divine life, are only so many different
   powers of the working of the will, and have all their efficacy, as so
   many parts of it; and only alter, raise, and bring forth a new life,
   because the working of the will is magical, and generates as it works,
   and unites with that which it willeth. And thus Christ, or the new man
   in Christ Jesus, is formed in us, from a seed of heaven, which is the
   will that can work towards God, till it becomes a godly birth, as the
   seed works towards the sun, till it is changed into the birth of a
   beauteous fragrant flower.

   [Way-2-112] Again, hence it is, namely, from this magic power of the
   working of the will, that our blessed Lord speaks so often of the
   omnipotence of faith; viz., "that all things are possible to him that
   believeth. Whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall
   receive. If ye had faith but as a grain of mustard seed, ye might say
   to this tree, be thou plucked up by the root; and to this mountain, be
   thou cast into the sea; and it should be done. Thy faith hath saved
   thee. According to thy faith, so be it done unto thee."

   [Way-2-113] Hence all these truths plainly follow: first, that faith,
   which is in itself only the working of the will, is the source of all
   power; and that all that is done in nature is done by it alone; and
   that therefore all nature standeth in a magic working of the will. For
   all things could not be possible to him that believeth, but because
   faith, or the working of the will, is the true source of all power in
   or over nature. Secondly, here is a full demonstration of the high and
   powerful state, in which man was at first created! A lord over all this
   outward world; who could, by the working of his will, command the
   obedience of all things about him.

   [Way-2-114] This was the dominion he had over all the creatures on the
   earth, in the sea, and in the air; not such a poor power as invented
   weapons, or the strength of his hands and feet, could help him to; but
   a power here mentioned, of standing still, and, by the faith or will of
   his mind, making every creature to come or go, just as the faithful
   disciple of Christ was, by his faith, to have power over every outward
   thing of this world.

   [Way-2-115] Now all this high state of his first power is undeniable
   from the words of our savior. For it is not to be supposed, that he
   would turn men's thoughts to any such powers, as to have all things
   obedient to their faith, or the working will of their minds, if this
   had not been man's first created state, or such powers as did then
   belong to it. For no man or creature can have any higher power, than
   that which belongs to his first created state.

   [Way-2-116] And therefore all gospel faith, however wonderful in its
   power, can only have somewhat of that first powerful faith, which man
   had when he first came out of the hands of God. And faith now in a
   redeemer can only be the means of obtaining salvation, for this reason;
   because faith was then that original high power in man, which could
   have preserved him in his first perfection and glory of life. Thus,
   when Christ saith, "Thy faith hath saved thee," it is the same thing as
   if he had said, faith had always such power; that faith was the
   strength and glory of the first man, that could have saved him from
   falling under the power of the stars and elements; that it was faith
   alone which could and did put an end to his first paradisiacal glory,
   by turning its strength and desire into the life of this world. Again,
   when our Lord saith, "According to thy faith, so be it done unto thee";
   this was no new thing, or new operation in the power of faith, but was
   only a declaration of a truth as old as nature and creature, and was in
   reality so much said of the powerful faith of the first man; and
   infallibly shows, that as now, so then, nothing was done to him in his
   fall, but that which was done according to the faith and working of his
   will. For this is God's immutable righteous procedure with man, that
   nothing but his own works can follow him; and that, from first to last,
   whether standing or falling, according to his faith, and working will,
   so must it be done unto him. And therefore man's faith, and working
   will, was his divine power of living superior to, and independent of
   all the stars and elements of this world, in his own angelic perfection
   of a divine life.

   [Way-2-117] For if the revival of faith, in so small a degree, as to be
   compared to a grain of mustard seed, could bring forth in man such a
   divine power over all the things of this world, is it not a sufficient
   proof of the high power of his first lost faith; which only thus coming
   again, as the smallest of seeds, yet comes with such mighty power over
   all outward nature, the flesh and the devil? And thus, all that is said
   in the gospel, of the power of faith, is, in the strictest truth, so
   much said of the power and perfection of our first father, over whom
   this earthly system had no power: but whether he stood, or fell, or was
   to rise again, all was, and is, and must be done, by his faith, or the
   working of his will.

   [Way-2-118] And thus also, you see, that all that was said of the
   nature and extent of the magic power of the will, is not only
   conformable to, but is the very spirit of the gospel, and all the
   written word of God. For from the first promise made to Adam, to the
   last written words of scripture, man is only called and directed to the
   true exercise of these magic, generating powers of the will; namely, to
   believe, to hope, to trust in God; to love, desire, and expect the
   renewal of a divine life from the goodness of God.

   [Way-2-119] Humanus. Give me leave only to add, that in these words of
   our savior, "According to thy faith, so be it done unto thee," and
   other such-like sayings, he has not only opened the true nature and
   power of faith, but has discovered more of the true philosophy of
   nature, than ever was told the world before. Faith is generally
   considered as a speculative thing, as an assent of the mind to the
   credibility of things related. This may sometimes, as well in the
   scriptures, as in other books, be called faith, as the same word may be
   used in various senses. But the faith in question, about which our
   savior speaks, and to which he ascribes so much power, and which alone
   can do a man any real good or harm, is quite of another nature: I say,
   good or harm; because all that is good or bad proceeds from it, and it
   carries its power which way it will: as it can work all wonders, and
   overcome the world, so it alone has power over life and heaven in the
   soul, can drive them out, and set up the kingdom of hell and death
   instead of them.

   [Way-2-120] Now this faith may be thus understood; it is that power by
   which a man gives himself up to anything, seeks, wills, adheres to, and
   unites with it, so that his life lives in it and belongs to it. Now to
   whatever the soul gives itself up; whatever it hungereth after; and in
   which it delights, and seeks to be united there, and there only, is its
   faith; that faith which can work either life or death, and according to
   which faith everything is, and must be done to man.

   [Way-2-121] Now this faith is not a matter of choice, so that a man may
   live without it, if he pleases; but is essential to his life, and
   altogether inseparable from it. For whatever the life drives at, to
   whatever it is given up, there is its living and powerful faith.
   Therefore, be a man given up to what he will, seeking, delighting, and
   acquiescing in whatever it be, temporal or eternal, whether it be
   Christianity, idolatry, Deism, or atheism; this is a certain
   conclusion, that every man in the world is a man of faith, lives by
   faith, and that equally so; because every man's life is equally given
   up to the seeking, and delighting in, and uniting itself to, something
   or other; and therefore every man equally lives by faith, and that in
   its highest degree. It matters not, whether a man delights and
   acquiesces in the philosophy of Epicurus, or Spinoza; whether he be
   given up to luxury and sensuality, or to syllogisms and definitions, to
   mysteries of redemption, or mysteries of atheism: he is neither more
   nor less a man of faith for all this; but is equally under the power of
   faith, whether it be divine, earthly, sensual, or devilish. For which
   way soever the life of man tends, or drives; to whatever he gives up
   himself; there he is, and lives by faith, and that in its highest
   degree; for no faith can rise higher than this. Nor can a man's faith
   be anywhere, but where his life is, and to which it belongs; nor can he
   be said to live to anything, but by faith. For faith is as much the one
   working power of life, as thought is the one working power of
   understanding; and the understanding of man may as easily proceed
   without being led by thought, as the life of man go on without being
   led by faith; that is, without giving itself up to something, or other,
   with which it would be united, and to which it would belong, as its
   desired good; which, as I said before, is the highest degree of the
   most living faith.

   [Way-2-122] The debate therefore, set up by the Deists, about reason
   and faith, as two principles of life; the one appropriated to
   Christians, and the other to themselves, is founded on the grossest
   ignorance of both their natures; as great as that of supposing, that
   there are two principles of seeing and smelling; viz., reason and the
   senses. And the Deist, who turns from all faith, to have a life of
   reason, proceeds as much according to nature, as if he was to leave it
   to Christians, to see and smell by their senses; but himself and
   brethren to see and smell by the power of reason. For reason is no more
   the power of life, than it is the power of the senses; but must stand
   below them both, and follow them both, in the same degree of inability
   to alter, increase, or lessen the natural power of either of them, as
   the eye hath to alter the vegetation, or color, or smell, of the plant
   on which it looks. For reason like the eye, is only an outward looker
   on; and can no more form, or model, or alter the life of the soul, than
   it can alter the life and vegetation of the body. But this saying,
   "According to thy faith, so be it done unto thee," contains the
   unchangeable ground, and true philosophy of life, and the power of
   life. And this saying takes in every individual of human nature and the
   Deist may as well think of turning death over to the Christians, and
   reserving immortality for himself, as to think of being anything else,
   either here or hereafter, but purely and solely that, which his faith
   has brought to pass in him. He may, indeed, easily enough keep himself
   free from all Christian faith; but, whether he will or no, a faith must
   do all in him, and for him, just in the same degree, as it does for the
   Christian. Let him make ever so many declarations against the
   superstition and blindness of faith; ever so many encomiums upon the
   beauty of axioms, syllogisms, and deductions of reason; his life is
   just as far from being a life of reason, as the Christian's is, who
   declares only for a life of faith. For as the eye and the nose have
   just the same nature, office, and power; and he cannot, as such, have
   either more or less from them, or be more or less helped by them; so
   reason and faith have just the same nature, office and power, in a man,
   and are always in him, and will always do the same for him, whether he
   be Christian or Deist. And was the Deist to change sides, he would be
   neither more nor less a man of faith and reason, than he was before;
   nor have got or lost any power either of faith or reason. He would only
   be under a divine, instead of an earthly and sensual faith; and his
   reason would not have changed its state, or office, or power, but only
   be the servant of a better master; that is, of a divine faith.

   [Way-2-123] Now, was not faith the power of life in every man, no man
   could live by faith, nor could it be the principle or power of life in
   any man. But seeing every man, whether earthly or heavenly, is that
   which he is, by faith; and faith will and must have its work in every
   man; and he cannot live without it, or free from it; hence is the
   absolute necessity of the one right faith, in order to salvation, and
   the impossibility of anything else to avail in the stead of it. Thence
   also it is, that Christianity applies not to the reason of any man,
   because reason is not the principle of life, or the former of it; but
   it calls the heart to a right faith, because man is only lost and
   separate from God and heaven by his faith in the things and powers of
   this world. And therefore all salvation does, and only can, arise from
   a faith turned to God; and also all damnation from faith in the things
   of this world. And no man can turn either to God, or to this world, but
   by faith; that is, by giving up himself either to the one, or the
   other; which is the highest act or power of faith. For there is nothing
   that works either to life or death, in any man, but that to which he is
   given up, by faith in it. And reason never had, nor ever can have, or
   do, anything else, but one and the same underwork, or office, let faith
   take which way it will.

   [Way-2-124] The delusion of the Deist lies here: he refuses an assent
   to the history of facts and doctrines of the gospel; and this is his
   proof to himself, that he lives by reason, and that it is the real
   principle of his life. On the other hand, he that assents to the
   history of facts and doctrines of the gospel, is, by the Deist,
   reckoned to be a man of gospel faith, and that lives by it. But this is
   all mistake on both sides. For this assent on one side, and dissent on
   the other, touches not the matter either of reason or faith. For both
   these persons, notwithstanding this difference of assenting, may not
   only be equally governed by faith; but have strictly one and the same
   faith. For if the things of this world have the heart of both of them,
   which very easily may be; then they have but one and the same faith,
   and are equally governed by it; for they both equally live by a faith
   in this world.

   [Way-2-125] The Deist therefore hath no other possible way of showing,
   that he is not as much a man of faith, as any Christian can be, but by
   showing, that he has no will, no desire, no inclination of heart left
   in him; that his life drives no way, is given up to no one thing, as
   its end and good; but that reason, without affection, carries him only
   from syllogism to syllogism, in quest of nothing. Then it is, that he
   may deem himself to be a man of reason, but not till then; for if he
   has any heart that hath any inclination to be united with, or belong to
   anything; then he becomes a man of faith, and he lives by faith in that
   to which he is given up, as much as any Christian does, who is given up
   to the mysteries of Christian redemption.

   [Way-2-126] I could not help saying thus much on this delusion, in
   which I have been so long ensnared myself, and therefore have the
   utmost good will and earnestness to help others out of it. And, to this
   end, I shall add the following passages, taken from a book, where this
   whole matter is justly said to be examined to the bottom. "We have no
   want of religion, but so far as we want to better our state in God; or
   so far as we are unpossessed of God, or less possessed of him than we
   might be, and our nature requires. This is the true and only ground of
   religion; viz., to alter our state of existence in God, and to have
   more of the divine nature and perfections communicated to us. Nothing
   therefore is our good in religion, but that which alters our state of
   existence in God for the better, and puts us in possession of something
   of God; or makes us partakers of the divine nature in such a manner and
   degree, as we wanted it. Everything that is in life, has its degree of
   life in and from God; it lives and moves and has its being in God. This
   is as true of devils, as of the highest and most perfect angels.
   Therefore, all the happiness or misery of all creatures consists only
   in this; viz., as they are more or less possessed of God, or as they
   differently partake of the divine nature, or according to their
   different state of excellence in God. But if this be a truth (and who
   can deny it?) then we have the certainty of demonstration, that nothing
   can be our good in religion, but that which communicates to us
   something of God, or the divine nature, or that which betters our state
   and manner of existence in God.

   [Way-2-127] "For if devils are what they are, because of their state
   and manner of existence in God; if blessed angels are what they are,
   because of their state, and manner of existence in God; then it
   undeniably follows, that all that is betwixt angels and devils, all
   beings, from the happiness of the one, to the misery of the other, must
   and can have no other happiness or misery, but according to their state
   and manner of existence in God, or according as they have more or less
   of the state of angels, or the state of devils, in them. Therefore
   nothing can be our good in religion, but that which alters our state
   and manner of existence in God, and renders us possessed of him in a
   different and better manner.

   [Way-2-128] "Now, if you was to send to the fallen spirits of darkness
   all the systems of your religion of reason, that have been published,
   to let them know that they have the power of their own restoration and
   happiness within themselves; that they need seek to nothing, but their
   own natural reason and understanding, and the strength and activity of
   their own powers, to raise them to all the happiness they are capable
   of; such a religion would be so far from altering or mending their
   state of existence in God, or doing them any good, that it would add
   strength to all their chains; and the more firmly they believed and
   relied upon it, the more would they be confirmed and fixed in their
   separation from God. And yet, a religion that must necessarily keep
   them in hell, is the only religion, that you have to carry you to
   heaven. May God deliver you from this error!

   [Way-2-129] "Hence it sufficiently appears, that your way of natural
   religion cannot be the way of salvation; because the want of salvation
   is nothing else, but the wanting to have our state and manner of
   existence in God altered for the better, or to have something of God
   communicated to us, which we want, and are capable of receiving. But if
   this is, and must be, the nature of salvation; then no religion can
   save us, or do us our proper good, or supply our proper want, but that
   which has power to alter our state of existence in God, or to
   communicate to us that of God, which we want, and are capable of. And
   therefore, nothing but that same power of God, which created us, which
   gave us our state and manner of existence in God, and communicated to
   us that which we possess in him, can redeem us, or help us to that
   state and manner of existence in him, which we have lost, and are in
   want of.

   [Way-2-130] "There never could have been any dispute about the
   possibility of saving ourselves by our own natural faculties, had not
   men lost all true knowledge both of God and themselves. For this
   dispute cannot happen, till men suppose God to be some outward being;
   that our relation to him is some outward relation; that religion is an
   outward thing, that passes between God and us, like terms of behavior
   between man and man; that sin hurts, and separates us from God, only as
   a misdemeanor hurts, and separates us from our prince; that an offended
   God either gives or refuses pardon to us, as an angry prince does to
   his subjects; and that, what he gives or forgives to us, is something
   as distinct or different from himself, as when a prince, sitting upon
   his throne, gives or forgives something to an offender, that is an
   hundred miles from him.

   [Way-2-131] "Now all this is the same total ignorance of God, what he
   is in himself, and what he is in relation to us, and the manner of his
   being our good, as when the old idolators took men to be gods. And yet
   nothing is more plain, than that your religion of reason is wholly
   founded upon all these gross and false notions of God. You have not an
   argument in its defense, but what supposes, that our relation to God is
   an outward relation, like that of subjects to their prince; and that
   what we do to and for God, as our service to him, is, and must be done,
   by our own power, as that which we do to and for our prince, must be
   done by our own power. And from these errors it is, that you draw this
   false conclusion, that if our own reason and natural power were not
   sufficient to obtain for us all that we want, and God requires of us;
   God must be less good than a good earthly prince, who requires no more
   of us, than that which we have a natural strength to do, or can do by
   our own power. And yet all this is pure absurdity, and has all the
   grounds of idolatry in it, as soon as you know, that God is no outward
   or separate being; but that we are what we are, have what we have, and
   do that which we can do, because he has brought us to this state of
   life, power, and existence in himself; because he has made us, so far
   as we are made, partakers or possessors of a life in him, and has
   communicated to us, such a life in himself; or in the words of
   scripture, because 'in him we live and move and have our being,' and
   consequently have no life, motion, or being, out of him. For from this
   state of our existence in God, it necessarily follows; first, that by
   the nature of our creation, we are only put into a capacity of
   receiving good. A creature, as such, can be in no other state; it is as
   impossible for him to enrich himself, or communicate more good to
   himself, as it was to create himself. Secondly, that nothing but God
   can do us any good. Thirdly, that God himself cannot do us any good,
   but by the communication of himself, in some manner, to us. Hence it is
   plain, that your religion of reason, which supposes, that we have
   natural powers, that can put us in possession of that which we want to
   be possessed of in God; or, that we need no more divine assistance to
   recover what we have lost of God, than to obtain a pardon from a
   prince; or, that God need communicate no more of himself to us in our
   reconcilement to him, than a prince communicates of himself to his
   pardoned subject; has all the mistakes, error, and ignorance of God,
   that is in idolatry, when it takes God to be something that he is not;
   and has all the false devotion that is in idolatry, when it puts the
   same trust in, and expects the same benefit from, its own powers and
   faculties, which idolators did in and from their idols. Your religion
   of reason, therefore, which you esteem as the modern refinement of the
   human mind, and more excellent and rational, than the faith and
   humility of the gospel, has all the dregs of the grossest heathen
   idolatry in it; and has changed nothing in idolatry, but the idol; and
   only differs in such a degree of philosophy, as the religion of
   worshiping the sun differs from the religion of worshiping an onion.

   [Way-2-132] "For as soon as it is known and confessed, that God is all
   in all; that in him we live and move and have our being; that we have
   nothing separately, or at a distance, from him, but everything in him;
   that we have no degree of being, nor any degree of good, but in him;
   that the almighty can give us nothing, but that which is something of
   himself; nor any degree of amendment or salvation, but in such degree
   as he communicates something more of himself to us; as soon as this
   great immutable truth is known, then it is known with the utmost
   certainty, that to put our trust in the sun, or an onion, or our own
   reason, if not equally absurd, is yet equally idolatrous, and equally
   prejudicial to our salvation."* {*A Demonstration of the gross and
   fundamental Errors of a late Book, entitled, A Plain Account of the
   Sacrament. p. 161.}

   [Way-2-133] And now, Theophilus, if you please, you may proceed in the
   matter you was upon.

   [Way-2-134] Theophilus. We have discoursed long enough for this time.
   Let silence, recollection, inward and outward retirement, have their
   work for a few days. They purify the heart; they weaken and disarm
   self; they strengthen the spirit of prayer, and help us not only to
   pray, but to find, to love, and live in God. Let us all desire such an
   interval as this; and then we shall be fitter to meet again for our
   mutual benefit. My friends, adieu.

   The End of the Second Dialogue
     __________________________________________________________________

   [Way-3-1] Academicus. If you please, Theophilus, pray go on, just where
   you left off at our last meeting. For this mystery seems to be at
   daybreak with me; and the approach of its light leaves me no power to
   be content without it.

   [Way-3-2] Theophilus. You have seen, that all nature begins and stands
   in a magic birth; and is only a large display of its working power in
   every kind of creature. You now want to see farther into this mystery,
   how eternal nature begins; and how God, the first, hidden,
   imperceptible cause of all after-things, manifests himself in the
   properties of a visible and working nature. Now I would, to the best of
   my power, gladly assist you in this matter, if I could find out a way
   of doing it, by opening in your heart a knowledge of God, of nature,
   and yourself, without helping you to a mere opinion, or increasing your
   thirst after ideal speculation. Tell me, therefore, what you propose by
   the gratification of this desire; or what effect you expect from such
   knowledge, as you here seek.

   [Way-3-3] Academicus. All that I desire by it is, to strengthen and
   confirm the ground on which I stand; that, seeing the true philosophy
   of religion, I may have nothing to fear from all that variety of
   attacks which now, more than ever, are made upon it by infidel reason.
   I hope, therefore, it is no vain curiosity, to desire to enter into the
   depth of this mystery, since I only desire thereby strength to resist
   all the enemies of religion.

   [Way-3-4] Theophilus. All this is right, and very well; provided you do
   but know who, and what, are the great and powerful enemies of religion.
   But this, perhaps, you do not so well apprehend, as you may imagine.
   Your own reason, born, and bred, and governed, by your own flesh and
   blood, is the most powerful enemy of religion that you have to do with,
   and whom you have the most to fear from.

   [Way-3-5] The men of speculative reason, whom you seem most to
   apprehend, are powerless enemies, that cannot strike at your religion
   with the strength of a straw. Did you but rightly see what their power
   is, you would see it as ridiculous, as that of a few water-engines
   trying to quench the fiery globe of the sun: for reason stands in the
   same inability to touch the truth of religion, as the water-engine to
   affect the sun. Nay, its inability is much greater; for could the
   water, thrown from the engine, be made to reach the sun, it would have
   some, though an insignificant, effect upon it; but reason can no more
   affect the truth of religion, than nothing can affect something. If
   reason seems to have any power against religion, it is only where
   religion is become a dead form, has lost its true state, and is
   dwindled into opinion; and when this is the case, that religion stands
   only as a well-grounded opinion, then indeed it is always liable to be
   shaken; either by having its own credibility lessened, or that of a
   contrary opinion increased. But when religion is that which it should
   be, not a notion or opinion, but a real life growing up in God, then
   reason has just as much power to stop its course, as the barking dog to
   stop the course of the moon. For true and genuine religion is nature,
   is life, and the working of life; and therefore, wherever it is, reason
   has no more power over it, than over the roots that grow secretly in
   the earth, or the life that is working in the highest heavens. If
   therefore you are afraid of reason hurting your religion, it is a sign,
   that your religion is not yet as it should be, is not a self-evident
   growth of nature and life within you, but has much of mere opinion in
   it.

   [Way-3-6] Observe the word "self-evident"; for there lies the truth of
   the matter; for you have no more of the truth of religion than what is
   self-evident in you. A blind man may be rich in notions and opinions
   about the nature, power, and good, of light; and in this case, one
   blind man may perplex another, and unsettle his notions; but when the
   light manifesteth itself, and is become self-evident, then he is at
   once delivered from all uncertainty about it. Now religion is light and
   life; but light and life can only manifest themselves, and can nowhere
   be known, but where they are self-evident.

   [Way-3-7] You can know nothing of God, of nature, of heaven, or hell,
   or yourself, but so far as all these things are self-evident in you.
   Neither could any of these things be of any concern to you, but because
   they can all of them be self-evident in you. For the bare history, or
   hearsay of any one thing, signifies no more to you, than the hearsay of
   any other thing. And if God and heaven, hell and the devil, the world
   and the flesh, were not all of them self-evident in you, you could have
   no more good or hurt from any hearsay about them, than from the hearsay
   of pleasant gardens, and dismal prisons, in the world of the moon.

   [Way-3-8] Let it be supposed, that your ingenious reason should suggest
   to you, that there are no devils or hell, and therefore no occasion to
   believe that revelation that gives an account of them: in this case, do
   but turn to that which is sensible and self-evident in you, and then
   you must know, in the same certainty as you know yourself to be alive,
   that there is wrath, self-torment, envy, malice, evil-will, pride,
   cruelty, revenge. Now say, if you please, there are no other devils but
   these, and that men have no other devils to resist; and then you will
   have said truth enough, have owned devils enough, and enough confessed,
   that you are in the midst of them; that you are everywhere tempted by
   them; and that flesh and blood is too weak to resist them, and
   therefore wants some kind of savior, of so contrary a nature, as has
   power to destroy these works of the devil in you.

   [Way-3-9] Now this is the only knowledge that you can possibly have of
   an outward hell, and outward devils; and this knowledge is as self-
   evident in you as your own thoughts, and is as near to you as your own
   life. But to see and know an outward hell, or outward devils, that are
   outward living creatures, can never be your own case, till all that is
   divine and human in you is extinguished; and then you will have
   knowledge enough, how hell is a place, and how the devils of rage,
   wrath, envy, and pride, are living creatures.

   [Way-3-10] Again, let it be supposed, that your sceptic reason had
   brought you into doubt about the being and providence of God in you:
   you have no occasion to consult the demonstrations which heathen
   philosophers, school divines, Deists, or atheists, have produced about
   it, from the existence of things; all concluding, as well Christians,
   as Deists and atheists, that there must be some eternal first cause
   from which all has proceeded.

   [Way-3-11] For what a God is this, that is only proved to be, because
   something now is, and therefore something must always have been, an
   infinite, eternal something, with infinite power to bring forth all
   that is come into being? What a God, I say, is this, which the Arian,
   the Deist, and the atheist, is as willing to own as the Christian; and
   which is as serviceable to the cause of Arianism, Deism, idolatry, and
   atheism, as it is to Christianity? For the atheist has his omnipotent,
   eternal, first cause, as well as all the disputers for a God.

   [Way-3-12] But now, if you turn from all these idle debates and
   demonstrations of reason, to that which is sensible and self-evident in
   you, then you have a sensible, self-evident proof of the true God of
   life, and light, and love, and goodness, as manifest to you as your own
   life. For with the same self-evident certainty, as you know that you
   think, and are alive, you know that there is goodness, love,
   benevolence, meekness, compassion, wisdom, peace, joy. Now this is the
   self-evident God, that forces himself to be known, and found, and felt,
   in every man, in the same certainty of self-evidence, as every man
   feels and finds his own thoughts and life. And this is the God, whose
   being and providence, thus self-evident in us, calls for our worship,
   and love, and adoration, and obedience to him: and this worship, and
   love, and adoration, and conformity to the divine goodness, is our true
   belief in, and sure knowledge of, the self-evident God. And atheism is
   not the denial of a first omnipotent cause, but is purely and solely
   nothing else but the disowning, forsaking, and renouncing the goodness,
   virtue, benevolence, meekness. of the divine nature, that has made
   itself thus self-evident in us, as the true object of our worship,
   conformity, love, and adoration. This is the one true God, or the Deity
   of goodness, virtue, and love. the certainty of whose being and
   providence opens itself to you in the self-evident sensibility of your
   own nature; and inspires his likeness, and love of his goodness, into
   you. And as this is the only true knowledge that you can possibly have
   of God and the divine nature, so it is a knowledge not to be debated or
   lessened by any objections of reason, but is as self-evident as your
   own life. But to find or know God in reality, by any outward proofs, or
   by anything but by God himself made manifest and self-evident in you,
   will never be your case either here or hereafter. For neither God, nor
   heaven, nor hell, nor the devil, nor the world, and the flesh, can be
   any otherwise knowable in you, or by you, but by their own existence
   and manifestation in you. And all pretended knowledge of any of these
   things, beyond or without this self-evident sensibility of their birth
   within you, is only such knowledge of them, as the blind man hath of
   that light, that never entered into him.

   [Way-3-13] And as this is our only true knowledge, so every man is, by
   his birth and nature, brought into a certain and self-evident
   sensibility of all these things. And if we bring ourselves by reasoning
   and dispute into an uncertainty about them, it is an uncertainty that
   we have created for ourselves, and comes not from God and nature. For
   God and nature have made that which is our greatest concern, to be our
   greatest certainty; and to be known by us in the same self-evidence, as
   our own pain or pleasure is. For nothing is religion, or the truth of
   religion, nothing is good or bad to you, but that which is a self-
   evident birth within you. So that if you call that only God, and
   religion, and goodness, which truly are so, and can only be known by
   their self-evident powers and life in you, then you are in the truth,
   and the truth will make you free from all doubts; and you will no more
   fear or regard anything that talkative reason can discourse against it,
   than against your own seeing, hearing, or sensible life. But if you
   turn from self-evidence to reason and opinion, you turn from the tree
   of life, and you give yourself up to certain delusion.

   [Way-3-14] Wonder not therefore, my friend, that though the mystery
   under consideration contains the greatest truths, yet I am unwilling to
   help you to reason and speculate upon it; for if you attempt to go
   farther in it than self-evidence leads you, you only go so far out of
   it, or from it. For the end of this mystery is not to furnish new or
   better matter for reason and opinion, but to bring man home to that
   sensibility, which is self-evident in himself, and to lead him only by
   self-evident principles, to see, and find, and feel the difference
   between true and false religion in the same degree of self-evident
   certainty, as he sees and feels the difference between fire and water.
   This, I say, is the great intent of this mystery, to bring man into a
   sensibility of God and nature, to know and feel, that good and evil,
   life and death, are a self-evident growth and birth of nature in man,
   according as his will enters into and works with that which is
   unchangeably good, or unchangeably evil, in the working of nature. Now
   as the workings of nature are unchangeable in their effects, and that
   which is naturally good or evil, must always be so; and seeing man's
   life standeth in nature, and must work with it, must have only that
   good or evil which is unchangeable in nature; and seeing his state in
   nature, whether good or evil, is, and can be, only that, which the
   sensible, self-evident powers of his own life manifest to him; then you
   see the fitness and necessity of your keeping steadily to that, which
   is self- evident in you, as the very tree of life, the criterion of all
   that truth and goodness that belongs to you. Secondly, you see with
   what good reason Jacob Behmen so often tells you, that all that he has
   written, was only to help man to seek and find himself, to see and know
   his place and state in nature, and how to cooperate with God and nature
   in generating a birth of heaven within himself. Thirdly, you may see
   how you and I should abase this blessed mystery, should we, instead of
   only and truly seeking and finding its birth within us, make it a
   matter of reasoning and opinion.

   [Way-3-15] Academicus. I have neither power nor inclination to object
   to anything that you have said. But still I must desire you to assist
   me in your own way, and such as you judge to be suitable to the
   intention of this mystery. I plainly see, that the whole ground of
   religion lies in the knowledge of what God is in himself, as distinct
   from nature; what nature is in itself; what I have from God, and what I
   am in and from nature; and how I am to work with it, as God himself is
   and worketh in nature. For if this knowledge can be opened in me, then
   the why, and the how, of every mystery of redemption must be seen to
   the bottom.

   [Way-3-16] Theophilus. By nature are meant, all the working, stirring
   properties of life, or all the various sensibilities which life is
   capable of finding and feeling in itself. And therefore you need only
   look at the working sensibilities of your own life, the several kinds
   and ways of feeling and finding your own state, to know by a self-
   evident certainty, what nature is in itself. And thus also, in the same
   self-evident certainty, you may know, that nature is not God. For as
   you find, that nature is opened in you; that all its properties have
   their existence in you; and yet that none of these properties of life
   are their own happiness, or can make themselves to be happy, full of
   peace, delight, and joy, and free from every want; so you have a full
   self-evident proof, that God is not nature, but entirely distinct from,
   and superior to, nature; and that, as considered in himself, he is that
   which alone can make nature happy, free from want, and full of all
   delightful satisfaction. And thus you know, not from hearsay, but from
   a self-evident certainty in yourself, that God, considered as in
   himself, is the happiness, the rest, the satisfaction, the joy, the
   fulfilling of all the properties and sensibilities of nature; and also
   that nature, in itself, is that working life of various properties and
   sensibilities, which want to be made happy, which reach after something
   that they are not, and have not, and which cannot be happy or
   fulfilled, till something of an higher nature than themselves be united
   with them; that is, the working of nature must be in want, in pain, and
   dissatisfaction, till God (the blessing and fulfilling of nature) is
   manifested, found, and enjoyed in it.

   [Way-3-17] Now suppose you knew no more of what God is in himself,
   distinct from nature, and what nature is as thus distinguished from
   God, than is already opened in you, you would know enough to be a key
   to all that which Jacob Behmen speaks of God, and of nature; and enough
   also to show you how to cooperate with God and nature, in bringing
   forth a new birth of the divine life within you. For as soon as you
   know, that nature in itself is only a working life of various
   sensibilities, which wants something distinct from itself, and higher
   than itself, to make it happy, then you have a self-evident certainty
   of these following truths: first, that God, considered as in himself,
   is the blessing, the satisfaction, the heaven, and happiness, of all
   and every sensibility of nature. Secondly, that therefore, as the
   gospel teaches, only the Word, the light, the Son of God, or Jesus
   Christ, can redeem fallen nature, restore it to its first state of
   blessedness in God. Thirdly, that therefore, as the gospel teaches, you
   have but one thing to do, and that one thing absolutely necessary to be
   done; viz., to deny yourself; that is, to turn this fallen nature from
   itself, from all its own wills and workings in the vanity of this life,
   to give up itself in faith, in hunger and thirst after that light,
   Word, Son, or Jesus Christ of God, who is the fullness, the
   satisfaction, the joy, and blessedness, of all nature; who alone can
   turn every working and sensibility of nature in a participation of
   heavenly satisfaction and joy. Now what can you desire, or need you to
   know of God, of nature, and the mystery of Christian redemption, more
   than this? And yet all this is a self- evident knowledge, born within
   you as soon as you turn to it.

   [Way-3-18] Academicus. Oh! Sir, you quite transport me with this short,
   easy, and yet full explication of so great a matter, which has often
   perplexed me. But now I shall never be at a loss how to understand the
   distinction between God and nature, and also the absolute necessity of
   it; which, when rightly known, sets all the doctrines and mysteries of
   Christian redemption upon such a ground as cannot be removed. But still
   I must beg of you to help me to the same self- evidence of the birth
   and generation of the properties of nature, as they are set forth by
   Jacob Behmen, especially of the three first forms, which I perceive to
   be the ground of all; and yet their birth and generation, their union
   with, and distinction from, one another, I do not enough comprehend, as
   he sets them forth. Thus, the first form of nature is said to be
   desire; which is the ground and foundation of all things. This desire
   (the first property), he saith, is astringing, drawing, shutting up,
   compressing, hardening. Now all this is evident enough; for I have a
   sufficient sensibility, that this is the nature of desire; that, in its
   spiritual way, it attracts, draws, compresses, and would shut up, or
   enclose. But then, it is immediately said, that the second property is
   attraction, drawing, sting, and motion. Now if the first is attraction
   and drawing, how can the second be different from it, and yet be
   attraction and drawing?

   [Way-3-19] Theophilus. The desire is not one property, but is in itself
   all the properties of nature; it is the ground in which they all dwell,
   and the mother out of which they are all born: so that all that is said
   of the three first forms of nature, is only so much said of three forms
   or properties of the desire. For the desire is not the first property
   of nature; but every property hath all that it hath in and from the
   desire. The first property of the desire, of that which is the
   peculiarity of its nature, as distinguished from the second, is, to
   compress, enclose, shut up., whence cometh thickness, darkness,
   hardness. But no sooner does the desire begin to compress, shut up, but
   it brings forth its own greatest enemy, and the highest resistance to
   itself: for it cannot compress or thicken, but by drawing or
   attracting; but drawing and attracting is quite contrary to shutting
   up, or compressing; because drawing or attracting is motion, and every
   motion is contrary to shutting up or compressing together.

   [Way-3-20] And thus your difficulty is removed: attraction or drawing
   is rightly ascribed to the desire, and rightly called its second
   property, because it is born of it; and yet is directly contrary to
   that which is the desire's first property or intention; viz., to
   compress, to hold in stillness.

   [Way-3-21] Now as these two properties are two resistances, not in two
   different things, but are one and the same thing in this contrariety in
   and to itself, as they are inseparable, generate each other, are equal
   in strength, and can neither of them overcome the other, so as to go
   one way, but each of them stops the other in the same manner; and
   seeing this desire cannot cease to be these two contrary things; viz. a
   holding-fast, and moving-away, a shutting-in, and a going-out, both in
   the same degree of strength; neither able to shut up, or to go out, nor
   able to cease from either; these two contrarieties become a whirling
   anguish in itself, and so bring forth a third property of nature. And
   in these properties lies the true ground of all sensibility of life,
   and also of every created thing. Matter, motion, darkness, fire, and
   every natural power or quality of anything, has its beginning from
   them. Considered in themselves, they are the working powers of that
   great and strong creaturely life, which cannot be broken, because it
   begets itself, and every property is included in, and generates each
   other. It is a band or knot of life, that can never be loosed; nor is
   capable of annihilation, because it is a birth of eternal nature, which
   is as unchangeable as God himself. And as it arises from no outward
   thing, but is generated in and from itself, its work is eternal, and
   can never be made to cease. For as one property has no power over the
   other, but that of forcing it to exist; as one property does not weary
   the other, but always gives strength to it; so there can be no
   cessation of their working, but they must do, as they do, to all
   eternity.

   [Way-3-22] Now the life of these three properties is a life of three
   contrary wills, equally strong and powerful against each other; and
   therefore is a life of the highest disquiet, torment, and anguish, full
   of the most horrible sensibility. It is a life that can feel nothing
   but its own tearing contrariety, that reigns with it. And this is the
   life of nature separated from God; it is the life of hell, and the
   devils; and is that life of dark, raging distraction, which every
   living creature must be in, whose first properties of life are not
   softened and quieted, either by the light of God, or the light of this
   world, dwelling and making peace in them. And he that will only seek to
   his reason, to cool the flame of these raging first properties of life,
   acts as wisely as he, whose house being on fire, would only have it
   extinguished, by reading a lecture upon the nature of water to it.

   [Way-3-23] And now, sir, you have seen plainly enough the birth,
   nature, and difference, of these three first properties. But let it be
   supposed, that you have no feeling, or inward sensibility, of these
   three properties in the manner they have been here described, according
   to Jacob Behmen; yet you have no reason to be troubled at it, or put
   your brain upon the rack how to conceive it, or fear that you must want
   the benefit of this knowledge, till you have it as above described; for
   you have in yourself a most self-evident proof, that the thing is
   really so; and that desire hath all that in it which he so deeply
   declares, from its first seed, or root.

   [Way-3-24] For it is a thing self-evident to you, that every desire, as
   such, is in itself a restless torment; that it has pain, disquiet, and
   anguish, in itself; and, as to itself, consists of nothing else. Now,
   whether you can, with Jacob Behmen, divide this restless, anguishing
   desire into its three essential parts, of which it consists, matters
   not, as to the reality of the thing itself; for you have sensibility
   enough, that the desire is made up of pain and anguish, till the thing
   desired is obtained: and therefore you have all the certainty and
   benefit of this knowledge; and it serves the same end, as if you knew
   the ground of it with the same exactness as he has set it forth.

   [Way-3-25] You have yourself for a proof, that desire and pain begin
   together; and this is a full proof of what was said; viz. that desire
   begins with two properties, that resist and strive against one another.
   Again, you have the same evidence in yourself, that the desire, left to
   itself, that is, without the least glimpse of any possibility of having
   that which it desires, is a degree of hell, and quite intolerable to
   itself: and this is a self-evident proof of what was said; viz. that
   the third and last property of the desire, is that whirling anguish,
   brought forth by the two first properties: for these three properties
   are the whole of the desire; it has nothing more in it. And when your
   desire cannot cease, and yet has nothing but itself, without the least
   mixture or feeling of hope in it, then you have a full self-evidence of
   all that which the desire is, in its three essential, inseparable
   properties, and that strictly according to the letter of Jacob Behmen.

   [Way-3-26] Now all that is nature, or natural life within you, is only
   the working of desire in this painful state; and that which can set
   this painful life at rest in you, is so much of God, or the divine
   nature, manifested in you, and changing your restless properties of
   life into peace and happiness. And as the working properties of desire
   are your natural life, so the same working properties are the life of
   eternal nature; from whence, as out of the womb, your natural life is
   brought forth, and hath neither more nor less in it than that which is
   in eternal nature.

   [Way-3-27] And if the working properties, which constitute the life of
   eternal nature, could be supposed to be without God in them, eternal
   nature would be a mere eternal hell: But as the eternal desire, with
   all its working properties, is brought forth by the magic power of the
   divine will, only for this end, that the holy Deity may manifest a
   heaven of glory in them; so eternal nature always was, and always must
   be, a kingdom of heaven, or the unchangeable manifestation of the
   invisible God in an outward sensibility of life, happiness, glory, and
   majesty.

   [Way-3-28] Academicus. I am fully satisfied as to this point; and all
   that you have said, has the evidence of light at noonday. And I hope
   you will now go on in the birth of the four remaining properties; and
   show me, in the same degree of evidence, how these three properties
   bring forth the four following ones, which turn nature into a kingdom
   of heaven.

   [Way-3-29] Theophilus. These three properties of nature cannot bring
   forth the four following ones. They can bring forth nothing but
   themselves to all eternity, nor can ever be anything else in
   themselves, but what they were at first. Nature can rise no higher than
   this painful state; and its painful working contrariety must always be
   the ground of all life, and all sensibility of life. For if (1.) this
   shutting-up, or compressing; and (2.) this resistance to it; and (3.)
   this whirling arising from both, was ever to cease, there life, and all
   sensibility, must cease with them; and therefore these three properties
   must always do as they do, as the only possible ground of every kind
   and degree of creaturely life, both in heaven, and on earth.

   [Way-3-30] But if life is to be happy, something else must come into
   them, not to destroy their natural working, but to make every
   contrariety in them a strife of joy, and delightful sensibilities.
   Thus, (1.) compressing, or shutting-up, must find itself only to
   compress and keep in light and love; (2.) the attraction or drawing-
   motion, must find itself to be the drawing and motion of love; and,
   (3.) the whirling anguish must whirl still, but as a transport of joy
   unavoidably brought forth from the strife of love in the two properties
   of which it is born. And thus nature remains in its full strength; it
   compresses, it attracts, and it whirls, as it did at first; and nothing
   is lost, or taken from it, but its hatred, wrath, and misery. Now here
   you are to observe, that every thing or creature, either in heaven,
   hell, or this world, hath its substance, or all that is substantiality
   in it, solely from these three first properties of nature. The
   creaturely substance of an angel, a devil, or a dead flint, all stand
   in these three first forms of nature. And all the difference betwixt
   high and low, spiritual and material, in the creatures, arises from
   their different participation of the four following forms of nature.
   But the four following forms cannot exist, or manifest themselves, but
   in the three first; and therefore the three first are, and must be, as
   well in the highest as in the lowest of creatures: they are the first
   something, or substantiality of nature, in which the light, and love,
   and Spirit of God could manifest itself; for spirit cannot work without
   something to work in and upon, and in which it may be found; nor could
   light shine, unless there was something in nature thicker than itself,
   to receive and reflect it: and therefore, thickness or darkness is, and
   must be, as eternal as the visible or shining light. Darkness is so far
   from being a mere negation, or only an absence, of the light, that it
   is the first and only substance, and the ground of all the possible
   substantiality in nature, and the substantial manifester of light
   itself, which could have no visibility, shine, or color, but in and
   through, and by the substantiality of darkness or thickness. This
   darkness, thickness, or substantiality, is not co-existent with, or
   independent of, God, but is the compressing, astringing, thickening
   work of the first property of the desire; which desire comes eternally
   from God, only as a magic birth from the will of the Deity, which
   willeth to come out of its hiddenness into an outward visibility of a
   working life. And therefore the desire is the beginning of nature; it
   compresseth and thickeneth. But what does it compress and thicken? Why,
   nothing but itself; viz. its own three properties. And these three
   properties thus brought forth, tied and bound in one another, are, from
   eternity to eternity, all the substantiality and thickness, that is or
   ever can be in nature, or any creature, from the highest to the lowest.
   And they are thus brought forth in this indissolvable band in and by
   the desire, that the invisible light and life of the hidden Deity may
   have its something to move and shine in; his hidden Spirit have
   something to work and manifest itself in; his hidden love have
   something into which it may give itself; and his hidden life have
   something in which it can open itself in a variety of births of life.
   And this something is the working compressing desire, which includes
   itself, (1.) a continual thickening, which is darkness and
   substantiality: (2.) motion or resistance to this thickening, which is
   the ground of all sensibility; and, (3.) a restless state of whirling
   from these two properties, which is the very nature and power of life.
   And thus these three properties of the desire, are that sufficient
   something, in which the Deity, by entering into it, can manifest his
   hidden power in all the substances and working properties of nature, by
   turning them all in their different workings into an endless variety of
   delightful forms and sensibilities of the creaturely life.

   [Way-3-31] Now this first thickness, darkness, or substantiality,
   brought forth in the desire, though it is not matter, as matter is seen
   and found in this world; yet these two things must be affirmed of it:
   first, that it stands in the same place, answers the same ends, and is
   distinguished from light and spirit in the eternal world, just as
   matter in this world stands distinguished from the light and spirit of
   this world. Secondly, that all the darkness, thickness, and matter of
   every kind in this world, is nothing else in itself, but the first
   thickness, darkness, and substantiality in the desire, brought down by
   various steps into such kinds of materiality as are here to be seen.
   Look at what kind of materiality you will in this world; it is, in its
   whole nature, nothing else but the darkness or thickness of the eternal
   world, brought into a farther degree of thickness and compression. And
   now we are come to see the true ground; (1.) how the angels could
   destroy their kingdom, or lose all the light and happiness of heaven in
   it: and, (2.) how also, their wasted, spoiled, darkened habitation in
   the divided properties of nature, could be turned, and created by God,
   as it is, into this new form of a material world.

   [Way-3-32] The first three properties of nature were never to have been
   seen or known, as they are in themselves, by any creature; their
   thickness, strife, and darkness, were brought forth by God, in union
   with the light, and glory, and majesty of heaven; and only for that
   end, that the holy Deity might be made manifest in them. And therefore
   their own nature, as they are in themselves, without God in them, could
   only then be first known, when the angels turned their desire backwards
   to search and find the ground and original of life, which could not be
   found, till these properties were found, in which the original ground
   of life lay hid. This turning of their desire into the origin of life,
   was their whole turning from the light of God; and therefore they found
   themselves where they had turned their desire; that is, in the center
   of nature; viz. in the first properties of nature, which is the dark
   center, or ground of life, which never should have been known or
   manifest to any creature. For by the center of nature, or the dark
   center, you are always to understand these three first properties;
   which, when without or separate from the light and goodness of the
   Deity in them, are in themselves only the thickness, and rage, and
   darkness, of an omnipotent compressing, and omnipotent resistance to
   it, and omnipotent whirling from these two omnipotent contrarieties. I
   call them all omnipotent, because they cannot be stopped, but do all
   that they would; and though they are contrary to one another, yet each
   of them gives strength to the other; so that the omnipotence of the
   one, is the omnipotence of the other. And this is the boundless,
   incessant, strong rage, darkness, and strife, of the hellish life,
   which only is that, which these three properties of nature, when left
   to themselves, can feel or find. Now the angels, which turned their
   desire into the center of nature, fell into the life and working power
   of these three properties; they felt nothing else in themselves, but
   these properties; they had no other will or power of working, but as
   these properties worked; and therefore, as living and active creatures,
   they could only live, and act, and cooperate, or unite with that ground
   of nature without them, which was the same and one with their own
   nature; and therefore, all that they could do, was to stir up, awaken,
   call forth, and act with that thickness and darkness, and strife, that
   was hidden in nature, just as the toad, in a fine garden, only sucks
   the poison that is hid in a good herb. So the fallen angels, though in
   heaven, having only the center of nature in themselves, could only find
   and work with that center and root of darkness, on which the heavenly
   glory stood. But from this power which they had of working in the
   center of nature, hence came forth a dark, wrathful substantiality,
   separated from the light and glory of the holy Deity; and thus a new
   kind of substantiality appeared in their kingdom; and their outward
   habitation was like their inward life; viz. a manifestation of nature
   fallen from God. And here now, you clearly see, how the first thickness
   or compression of the first property of nature, which was only the
   hidden substantiality of the light and glory of heaven, came into a
   more outward state, and made its first approach or step towards matter,
   as you now see it. For there was now a thickness, a darkness, and
   hardness, which never had been before; for the light being lost, then
   the first property of nature lost its beatified state of meekness,
   transparency, and spiritual fluidity; and became stiff, rigid, dark,
   and hard; and this, as I said, was its first step or descent towards
   the hardness and darkness of the matter of this world, till it came to
   be earth and stones, by the creating power of God. And thus it came to
   pass, as Moses speaks, that darkness was upon the face of the deep. A
   state, that had no possibility of existence, till the sin of angels had
   manifested the hidden center of nature, in the working of its three
   properties, without the light of God in them.

   [Way-3-33] Now as a new thickness of darkness, hardness, or
   substantiality, was manifested by the strong working powers of the
   angels in the center, or the first properties of fallen nature; so God,
   to manifest his wisdom and goodness towards this fallen nature, took
   all these properties in their own working way; and made them in their
   own way of working, to stop and overcome the evil that was brought
   forth by them. For the will of God, joining with the wrathful
   astringency of the first compressing property of nature, became the
   divine fiat, which increased this compacting property to such a degree,
   as created or compacted the darkened substantiality into a globe of
   earth and stones. And this same divine fiat, or creating power, which
   coagulated the grossness into earth and stones, compressed or
   coagulated all that was substantial, or belonged to substantiality
   through their whole kingdom, as well the heavenly as the earthly part
   of it; so that all their kingdom, as to its substantiality, lost its
   spirituality, and entered into a new created or compacted state of
   thickness, as well the spoiled as the unspoiled part of their kingdom.
   And as soon as this was done, the angels lost all their power in it,
   and over it. They could kindle no more wrath in its heavenly part, nor
   make any use of that which they had spoiled, because all was shut up
   together in this new compaction, with which the spirituality of their
   nature could have no communication. And so they were left prisoners in
   their own chains of darkness, unable to stir up wrath anywhere but in
   themselves. All this was done in the first day of the creation, when
   the fiat of God compressed or created their whole kingdom into a heaven
   and earth. Hence it is; viz. from a compaction of their whole kingdom
   into a new-created heaven and earth; that all things in this world, all
   its elements and stars, are a mixture of good and evil, have something
   of the wrath and evil of hell in them. Hence is the great variety of
   metallic ores and precious stones in the earth; the good and bad
   qualities in fire, air, and water. It is because the divine fiat, or
   compacting power, came at once in the utmost swiftness upon their whole
   kingdom, as the good and evil stood in strife against each other, and
   compressed all into a state of cessation and conjunction with one
   another, as in the prison of this new-created materiality. And thus the
   heavenly and hellish part of their kingdom, light and darkness,
   fluidity and hardness, meekness and wrath, good and evil, were all shut
   up together in the same sudden compaction; in which they lay, as in a
   state of death, till the divine fiat should awaken a life in it.

   [Way-3-34] Now the three first properties of nature; the first, a
   shutting up; the second, a running out; and the third, a whirling; were
   by the divine fiat, in the three first days of the creation, become the
   ground of an earthly, a watery, and airy materiality, all according to
   the working nature of the three properties; and all of them having
   something of an heavenly nature shut up in them, which wanted to be
   delivered from its bondage. Hence this threefold materiality of earth,
   water, and air, became a subject fit for the birth of the fourth
   property of nature. And therefore, on the fourth day of the creation,
   the divine fiat kindled in this anguishing materiality, out of that
   very fire and light that was compacted and hid in it, the fourth
   property of nature (the eternal fire), as a globe of fire and light,
   which was to stand as an out-birth of the eternal fire, in the midst of
   this new- created materiality, and become the opener of all the astral
   life and light in this world. And as the eternal fire, the fourth
   property of eternal nature, is not a movable thing that can change its
   place, but must be always in the place of its birth, standing forever,
   as a birth, in the midst of the seven properties, forever changing the
   three first properties of nature into the three last properties of the
   kingdom of heaven; so the sun, the true out-birth of the eternal fire,
   and having the same birth and office in this material world, as the
   eternal fire hath in eternal nature, is not, cannot be, a movable
   thing, or be in any other place in this world, than where it is; but
   is, and must be, the center or heart of this whole system, ever
   separating the three first properties of this material world, from the
   three that follow, and ever changing the three first forms of material
   wrath into the three following forms of terrestrial life, light, and
   all delightful sensibilities; in strict conformity to that, which the
   eternal fire does in eternal nature, changing the root, or first
   properties of nature, into a kingdom of God, and heavenly glory. For
   the sun is not a body of fire brought into the place where it is; but
   the kindled place is its body and birth; and therefore it is as
   immovable as place is, and must be as it is; viz. a place giving forth
   fire and light till all material nature is dissolved. The place is
   kindled, not by any foreign fire, but thus: in the first compaction of
   the whole angelic kingdom into this new materiality, the good and bad
   part, that is, the spoiled and unspoiled substantiality of their whole
   kingdom, was shut up in this new compression or materiality, in one and
   the same state of death. Secondly, in the beginning of the creation,
   God, said, "Let there be light," and there was light; not a shining
   light, for that came first from the birth of the sun, but a power or
   virtue of heavenly light, not yet in a visible, material shine, but as
   an uncreated power of light, entering into this whole materiality, to
   stir up, and awaken the good part of the heavenly substantiality, that
   was shut up in the compaction of this new materiality.

   [Way-3-35] Without these two things, material nature must have
   continued in its darkness, and no fourth form of fire could ever have
   come forth in it. But from these two things, viz. the heavenly
   substantiality, stirred up by the power of light entering into it, the
   three first properties of darkness were brought into a mere anguishing
   state; from whence, by the divine fiat, the fourth form of material
   nature kindled itself, as a fire, and broke forth in the place of the
   sun, and must be ever burning and flaming in the midst of the material
   system; because it is born of the three first properties of darkness,
   and brings forth the three last properties of light, and life, and the
   joy of nature; and therefore must always be in the midst of the six
   properties of nature, itself making the number to be seven. And thus
   the sun, as the fourth form of nature, must always stand in the midst
   of the whole material system. And this proved, not as Copernicus proved
   it, from reasonable conjectures, and outward arguments, but from the
   internal nature of its birth, the first root from which it proceeds, an
   the absolute impossibility of its being otherwise. And thus it is, that
   the truth and depth of nature is opened by the Spirit of God, in the
   mystery made known to our illiterate shoemaker. And thus you have a
   short sketch, how this world came to be as it is. It is descended as an
   out-birth of the eternal world, and all the seven properties of eternal
   nature work in it, as they work in eternity; and the eternity is
   manifested in the temporary working of a new world, which is only to
   stand in this state of thickness or compaction for a time, till the
   goodness of God towards fallen nature has been sufficiently manifested
   thereby.

   [Way-3-36] For as this material system of things may, in a good sense,
   be said to be an unnatural state, occasioned by the disorders which the
   fall of angels brought into nature; and as it had no beginning, but
   from the will of God, commanding the first property of nature to
   coagulate and compress their disordered kingdom into a new thickness or
   materiality, only as a remedy to stop, remove, and overcome the evil in
   nature; so when this remedy shall have had its trial, and the will of
   God shall no longer will this compressing together; then all that has
   been brought together by it, must fall back again into its first
   eternity. And then, without any possibility of being otherwise, every
   birth in this world, that belongs to the root or center of nature, and
   has worked with it, must fall down into that eternal abyss of darkness,
   on which the light of God forever stands, unknown to it. And every life
   that is born of heaven, and has worked with it, must ascend into the
   kingdom of God, or abyss of divine glory and majesty.

   [Way-3-37] Oh Academicus! Look now (whilst these thoughts are alive in
   you) at worldly greatness, fleshly wisdom, and earthly schemes of
   happiness; and tell me, if you can, what a nothingness, what a folly
   and delusion, there is in them? Look again at the apostle's pilgrim,
   abstaining from worldly lusts, desiring to know nothing but Christ, and
   him crucified; living in the spirit of prayer, and thirst after God;
   striving in everything after the fullest conformity to the tempers,
   Spirit, life, and behavior of Christ in this world; and then tell me,
   whether heaven and earth, God and nature, and all that is great, and
   wise, and happy, does not call upon you to be this pilgrim.

   [Way-3-38] Academicus. Truly, sir, I enough see, that all worldly
   wisdom, and ambitious views of a glory of life in the things and
   concerns of this world, are no better than vain attempts to be blessed
   and happy from the ruins of the angelic kingdom. For this world is only
   a thickness and materiality of the bestial life, built upon the ground
   of hell; that is, upon the first properties of fallen nature, brought
   into a harder, more compacted state of existence than they have in
   hell, and kindled into an astral, terrestrial, bestial life, by the
   power of the sun. The bestial life, therefore, is the highest good and
   happiness in it; and the creatures of this world have nothing that they
   seek for further in it. But man, being not created for it, but by sin
   fallen into it, is the only creature that makes an unnatural use of it,
   and seeks for that in it, and by it, which cannot be found in it. Man,
   having been wise, great, and happy in his creation, though they are all
   lost, has yet some remaining sensibility of them, though fallen into a
   world, that cannot help him to them. Hence it is, that he would be
   wise, and great, and happy in a world, that has no happiness but for
   beasts; and can only help man to know, that he is poor and miserable,
   and banished from his true native country.

   [Way-3-39] But, instead of learning this one lesson of truth, from the
   world he is in, which is all the wisdom, greatness, and happiness, that
   can be had from it; he gives himself up to a wisdom that is
   foolishness, a greatness that is all meanness, and a happiness that
   begins and ends in torment and delusion. Would you see all his
   greatness, wisdom and happiness united, the sum total of earthly glory!
   It is, when he has in his cap the feathers of some birds, wears a
   painted ribband, laced clothes, is called by some new name, and drawn
   from place to place by a number of beasts. Now, poor, and mean, and
   unnatural as this fiction of earthly glory is; yet this is the powerful
   idol, that carries all before it! that destroys all sense of goodness,
   and divine virtue! and keeps the heart of man so earnestly devoted to
   it, that he has no sense of the eternity that is in him; that eternity
   brought him forth, and eternity will take him again!

   [Way-3-40] Theophilus. It is true, Academicus, that the highest good of
   this world is its bestial life; and therefore it has no more, or other,
   happiness for a man than for a beast; can give no more to one, than to
   the other; viz. food and raiment; with which the bestial life in man
   ought to be content, as well as in the beast. But seeing man, in spite
   of the nature of things, will have an earthly glory of life; thence it
   is, that the wisdom of this world is, and must be, foolishness with
   God, and will be foolishness with man, as soon as he gets but a
   moderate knowledge of himself. But give me leave just to observe, that
   though this material world has no higher happiness than the bestial
   life; yet God hath much higher ends in creating it. For though the dark
   wrathful properties of fallen nature could only, in their compaction,
   be made the ground of a vegetable and bestial life; yet you are to
   observe, that in the creation of this world; viz. in the compaction of
   the whole angelic kingdom; the unspoiled heavenly part thereof was shut
   up with that, in which the wrath was kindled: and that for these two
   great ends; first, that, by this compaction, it might be taken out of
   the power of the evil angels, that they might not go on in kindling
   wrath in it. Secondly, that this reserved good part of their kingdom
   might be the foundation and ground of an heavenly paradisiacal life,
   and a new host of heavenly creatures, instead of the fallen angels.
   Now, to do this, God created an human angel, who was to call forth the
   paradisiacal life out of the compacted heavenly substantiality, as the
   sun opened a vegetable bestial life, out of the gross substantiality of
   the material world.

   [Way-3-41] God breathed the triune Spirit of the holy Deity into a body
   taken out of the earth, that is, into a body of that heavenly
   substantiality, that was shut up in the earth, as well as in every
   other part of this material system; and therefore his body is rightly
   said to be taken or formed out of the earth; because it was formed of
   that substantiality, that was shut up in the earth.

   [Way-3-42] But when his wandering eye had raised a longing desire to
   know what the earthly life was in its good and evil, and took the
   certain means of knowing it; then, as his soul lost the light and
   Spirit of God, so it lost also that heavenly luminous body, in which
   the light and Spirit of God could dwell, as it dwelleth in heaven. And
   when this heavenly luminous corporeity was lost, and shut up again in
   that earthly bondage and compaction, in which it lay, before it was his
   body; then the poor fallen soul was only clothed with the gross
   corruptibility of bestial flesh and blood. You are to understand this
   matter thus: when his body was formed out of that heavenly
   substantiality, that was in the compaction of the earth, it was not
   entirely separated from all earthly materiality (because he was to have
   a body of this world, as well as of the heavenly world); but its state
   in the earthly materiality was entirely changed; it was till then shut
   up in the earthly compaction, but now it is called out of that earthly
   death into a state of life; it is set free from the power of the earth,
   in a superiority over it, to be its happiness, and open its own glory
   in it, and through it.

   [Way-3-43] And thus you see the possibility, the truth, and the manner
   of the thing; how his heavenly body was taken out of the earth at his
   creation, set in freedom from it, and in a living superiority over it;
   how, at the fall, it was swallowed up, or compacted again in its own
   first earth; viz. the earthly body, or materiality of Adam: for as it
   was not separated from this earthly materiality, but only brought to
   life in it, and superiority over it; so when the divine light, which
   was the life of this body, was lost, it then fell again into a state of
   death in that gross materiality, under which it lay before. And thus,
   in the strictest truth, the body of Adam returned again to that very
   earth, or dust, from whence it was taken.

   [Way-3-44] Now, when this happened, the fallen angels entered again
   into some power in their lost kingdom. There was then something found,
   with which they could work, and join their own power. For as the soul
   of man had lost the light and Spirit of heaven, so the same dark center
   of nature, or the three first wrathful properties, were opened in it,
   as are opened in the fallen angels. And thus they got entrance into the
   awakened hell in man, and can work in it. For as often as man stirred,
   followed, or worked with his will according to these properties, the
   devil could enter into, and work with him; and so the first son of
   fallen man was made a murderer. And hence it is, that sin and
   wickedness have known no bounds; it is because it is the joint work of
   fallen angels, and fallen man.

   [Way-3-45] Stay a while, sir, in view of these truths: here you see the
   seat and ground, the birth and growth of all sin and evil; it lies in
   these three dark, selfish, self-willed, wrathful, hellish properties of
   the fallen soul. This is the dark center of nature, in which the devils
   have all their own power in themselves, and all their power in you; and
   till you resist this hell within you, till you live in contrariety to
   it, the devils will not flee from you.

   [Way-3-46] Here also you see, in a self-evident light, the deep ground,
   and absolute necessity, of that one redemption, which is called, and
   is, the meekness and heavenly blood of the Lamb of God. For these words
   in their true ground mean only the changing of the three first dark
   wrathful properties of fallen nature, into the three last properties of
   the heavenly life, light, and love, which is the life of God restored
   to the soul, or the light, Spirit, or Word of God born again in it. Let
   me only add this one word; turn from wrath of every kind, as you would
   flee from the most horrid devil; for it is his, it is he, and his
   strength in you. Whether you look at rage and anger in a tempest, a
   beast, or a man, it is but one and the same thing, from one and the
   same cause; and therefore your own wrath is to be turned from, as the
   same with that of hell; and which has its birth and strength from that
   hell or center of nature, which the fall of angels hath made known; and
   which only worketh thus differently, whether it be in a man, a beast,
   or the elements of this world. And this must be, till the center of
   nature is again in its place of hiddenness, by being wholly overcome by
   heaven. Embrace therefore every meekness of love and humility with the
   same eagerness as you would fall down at the feet of Jesus Christ; for
   it is his, {"is" missing in printed text, but see sentence 3 of this
   paragraph for exact parallel} it is he, and his power of salvation in
   you. Enter into no strife, or self-defense against anyone, that either
   reproaches you, or your doctrine; but remember, that if you are to join
   with Christ in doing good, your sword of natural wrath must be locked
   up in its own sheath; no weapons of the flesh are to be used; but you
   must work only in the meekness, the sweetness, the humility, the love
   and patience of the Lamb of God; who, as such, is the only doer of
   good, the only overcomer of wrath, and the one redemption of fallen
   nature. If you are reproached as an enthusiast, do not take comfort in
   thinking, that it is the truth of your own piety, or the want of it in
   others, that gives occasion to the charge; for though both of these
   should happen to be the case, yet they are not proper reflections for
   you; and if you take your peace from them, it is not the peace of God
   in you: but as in good report, you are to be as though you heard it
   not, ascribe nothing to yourself from it; so in evil report, self is
   just as much to be forgotten; and both of them are to be used, only as
   an occasion to generate humility, meekness, love, and the Spirit of the
   Lamb of God, both in yourself, and all that speak either well or ill of
   you. For this is the will and working of heaven; it has but one will,
   and one work; and that is, to change all the wrath, evil, and disorder
   of nature, into a kingdom of God. And therefore he that would be a
   servant of God, and work with heaven, must will all that he willeth, do
   all that he doth, and bear all that he beareth, in that one Spirit, and
   one will, with which heaven ruleth over all the earth.

   [Way-3-47] You rejoice to think, that you know the true ground of your
   redemption; how heaven comes again into the fallen soul, when that
   property of light and love, which is called the fifth property of
   nature, is generated in it. It is indeed a blessed knowledge; but its
   blessedness is only then yours, when yourself are this fifth property,
   that is, when your life is a life of this fifth property; when,
   whatever you do, wherever you go, or whatever you meet, you only do as
   this fifth property doth, give nothing but that which it giveth; viz.
   its gentle light and love to every man, and everything, whether it be
   good or bad. For this property hath nothing else to give, and yet is
   always giving; its nature is, to communicate and impart itself, not
   here or there, but always and everywhere; it has no other will. When
   therefore this property (the Christ of God, and the life of heaven) is
   born in you, friend and foe will have the same from you; you will have
   lost all resentment; you will love your enemies; bless them that curse
   you; pray for them that despitefully use you; and have but one will
   towards every man, and that is, that light and love may do that for
   him, which they have done for you.

   [Way-3-48] Academicus. Oh! Theophilus, you have given me more than I
   know how to contain; and yet have increased my thirst after more still.
   You have so touched the cord of love within me, that all my nature
   stands in a trembling desire after it; I would fain feel nothing else
   but the gentle godlike power of love, living in my heart. Pray
   therefore, of all things, help me to understand how the fire, the
   fourth property of nature, is born; and how it turns the first three
   wrathful forms into the three following forms of heavenly joy, triumph,
   and happiness; the first of which three forms, is this fifth of light
   and love: therefore, help me here, I beseech you.

   [Way-3-49] Theophilus. What a therefore have you here drawn? That
   therefore, of all things, I must need help you to an opinion, or
   notional knowledge, how the fire is born, and how it turns nature into
   a kingdom of God. For was I to join with you in forming notions of this
   how, I should only help you to lose all, by being content with the
   shadow, instead of the substance.

   [Way-3-50] You say, that your nature stands in a trembling desire after
   the birth of this light and love: if so, you stand in the very place of
   its birth, and must stand there till it is born in you. It can be born
   nowhere else, nor in any other manner; and all that Jacob Behmen has
   written, is only to direct and bring you to this place of its birth. He
   himself has given you all the hearsay knowledge that you can have of
   it; for he can give you no more from the plainest words. And therefore,
   to help anyone to work with his brain for clear notions, and rational
   conceptions, of what he has written, is helping him to do and be that,
   which all his works, from the beginning to the end, absolutely declare
   against, as contrary to the whole nature and end of them. Which speak,
   as he saith, with the sound of a trumpet; and chiefly to awaken man out
   of the dream and death of rational, notional, and hearsay knowledge;
   and to show him, that his own inward hunger and thirst after God, is
   that alone which can and must open the fountain of light and divine
   knowledge in him.

   [Way-3-51] But to speak a word or two of the fire, whose birth you want
   to know. You know already, better than any words can tell you, from a
   self-evident knowledge, that nature is in you; that it is not God, but
   is that which wants God, or its true good; and must be an emptiness, a
   pain, and want, till God is manifested in it. If you ask why nature is
   only a state of want and disquiet, and unable to be content with
   itself; it is because the eternal, uncreated, incomprehensible light,
   which no creature can enter into, is that which gave birth to all
   nature, and from whence all nature hath its hungering, and state of
   want. For nature had never come into being, but that the eternal,
   incomprehensible light longed to be manifested in an outspoken life of
   nature and creatures, and in a visibility and shine of glory:
   therefore, as nature came forth from this first longing of the light to
   be manifested in it, so nature is in itself only a want and hungering,
   which the light alone has raised, and can only satisfy.

   [Way-3-52] Now from this longing on both sides, nature wanting God, and
   God wanting to be manifested in nature, the union of both is effected;
   which is the birth of that eternal fire, or fourth form of nature,
   which is always burning in the same degree, that is, always doing the
   same thing; viz. always overcoming and shutting up the three first
   forms of nature, and making them to be the hidden root and center of
   nature; and always bring forth out of them the three following
   properties of light and love, and every joyful sensibility of life;
   that is, changing nature into a kingdom of heaven. Now that which makes
   this change in the properties of nature is, and is rightly called,
   fire, in the strictest literal meaning of the word; because all that we
   can conceive as fire in this world, hath its whole nature, power, and
   existence, from it. Not only the fire of life in animals and
   vegetables, but the fire in the kitchen, and the candle, are each of
   them kindled as it is kindled, and doth all that it doth from this
   fourth property, or fire of eternal nature. The thickness and darkness
   in the wood, and the candle, have fire kindled in them, and light from
   that fire, in no other way, than as the fourth property is a fire from
   the thickness and darkness of nature, kindled by the light of God
   entering into union with it. Had the wood, and the candle, no water or
   oil in them, neither of them could give forth fire and light. Now water
   and oil have the properties of light in them: when therefore the
   properties of nature in the wood, and the candle, are put into strife,
   and begin to work in blackness and darkness (which is the beginning of
   every fire), they by this strife open an entrance for the properties of
   light in the water, and the oil, to mix and unite with them; and by
   this union of darkness and light, that fire is kindled, which turns the
   darkness of the wood and candle into a shining and light. And thus does
   every fire kindled in this world bear an infallible witness to the
   kindling, the nature, and power, of that eternal fire, which, kindled
   by the oil of divine light, changes the first dark properties of nature
   into the light and majesty of heaven. Now what would you know more of
   fire, or its birth, than that it is, and only can be, kindled by the
   light of God entering into, and uniting with, the first properties of
   nature in the soul? Leave off therefore all working with your reason in
   the way of notions; empty your heart of all vain satisfactions in
   earthly things, that so the first properties of nature in your soul,
   finding their misery, and want of God, may make you to be all hunger,
   and faith, and desire of him. And then the fire must kindle, nothing
   can hinder it; God will then infallibly come as a fire and light into
   your soul, changing all the wanting, empty, restless properties of your
   natural life, into a sweetness of a new birth of rest and peace in him.

   [Way-3-53] For nothing works either in God, or nature, or creature, but
   desire. And as God created angels and men out of eternal nature, only
   through a longing desire of manifesting his own goodness and happiness
   in them, so every angel and man must find God, as a life of happiness
   and goodness in him, as soon as nature, either in angel or man, is
   become a hunger after God. For hunger does all in all worlds, and finds
   all that it wants, and hungers after. Everything had its beginning in
   it, and from it; and everything is led by it to all its happiness.

   [Way-3-54] Academicus. I am quite satisfied in all my demands, and will
   ask for no more help, as to the use I am to make of our author's
   writings. Only tell me when they will all come forth in a new edition,
   or which will be published first; for I want several of them, which I
   could never get.

   [Way-3-55] Theophilus. If you have but two or three of his books, it is
   enough; for everyone of them has all in it that you need be taught, and
   sufficiently opens the ground of the whole mystery of the Christian
   redemption. He himself thought his books to be too numerous; and
   expressed his wish, that they were all reduced into one. As he wrote
   without any art, and had no knowledge of regularity of composition; so
   whatever particular matter he occasionally entered upon, he always
   began again afresh from the same first ground, and full opening of the
   mystery of nature, from whence he explained and determined the matter
   he was upon. And it was this frequent, and almost constant, repetition
   of one and the same ground that swelled his writings into so many
   volumes; though it may be said, that there is nothing separately in any
   of his books, but what is to be found in almost every other, though not
   so largely set forth. You have no need therefore to run with eagerness
   through all his books; but the thing that you are to intend and look
   for, is the ground and foundation on which all his doctrines are built,
   which contains the true philosophy, or fundamental opening of all the
   powers that work both in nature and grace; and that by this knowledge
   you may become a true workman yourself; and know how to conform to, and
   concur with, all that the working powers, either of nature or grace,
   require of you. Now this ground and foundation of all is (as far as
   words can do it) opened to you in every one of his books: and you have
   been already also sufficiently brought into the knowledge of it, by
   what has been said of the birth of nature; what it is, how it works,
   how it came into being, how it is distinct from God, how it wants God,
   how God is manifested in it, how every after-thing is from and out of
   it, is all that it is, and hath all that it hath, in it, and by it, and
   must have all its happiness or misery, according as it works with, or
   contrary to nature. From this fundamental ground, or opening of the
   working powers of nature, you have seen how angels could and did, lose
   their first state in nature; and how a second new creation could, and
   did come out of their fallen state and kingdom, all according to the
   powers of fallen nature, overruled, and governed, and put into a new
   way by the good creating fiat of God. You have seen how this new
   creation, with man its lord, could, and did, lose also their first
   created state in nature; and how God, overruling fallen nature again,
   did, by his merciful redeeming fiat, or by the means of the holy Jesus,
   put this fallen new creation in a state of recovery, and all done
   according to the powers, and workings, and possibilities of nature. So
   that nothing is done arbitrarily, or by mere will, but everything in
   conformity to the unchangeable workings and powers of nature; only
   directed, assisted, and helped, by the mercy of his redeeming fiat, so
   far as nature was capable of being helped. This, sir, is the true and
   fundamental ground of all his doctrines; and, standing upon this
   ground, you stand in the center of truth, whence everything that you
   need to know of God, of nature, of heaven, of hell, of the fall of man,
   of his redemption only and solely in and by the Word or Son of God, is
   known in such self-evident certainty, as you find and know the workings
   of your own life: and also, that happiness, or misery, life or death,
   can only be had, or not had, lost or found, solely as a birth in
   nature, brought forth by the faith, or magic power of the will of man,
   working either with, or contrary to, the redeeming fiat of God.

   [Way-3-56] To make therefore a right use of his writings, you should,
   for a sufficient time, keep solely to that part of them, which opens
   the ground and foundation of the powers that work in grace and nature,
   till by a self-evident sensibility it is opened in you, and your heart
   stands in a conformity to it, and true working with it: for it is your
   own heart, as finding the working powers of nature and grace in itself,
   and simply given up in faith to work with them, that is to be your key
   and guide to that knowledge you are to have of them; whether it be from
   the Holy Scripture, or the writings of this author. For to this end, he
   tells you, he has written all; viz. to help man to seek and find
   himself; what is his birth, his state and place in nature; what he is
   in body, soul, and spirit; from what worlds all these three parts of
   him are come; how they came to be as they are at present; what his fall
   is, and how he must rise out of it. And therefore, if, in order to seek
   and find this ground in yourself, you was, for some sufficient time, to
   read only to the 10th chapter of his Three Principles, or to the 6th or
   8th chapter of his Threefold Life; and proceed no farther, till this
   ground had made itself manifest in you, and your heart stood in a
   strict conformity to it, and working with it; you would then be in a
   true fitness to read farther, and reap the full benefit from any other
   of his books, that should fall into your hands; whether it was the Way
   to Christ, or the book upon the Incarnation. But, above all things,
   remember this advice, as of the last moment to you, Be no reasoner upon
   the mystery; seek for no commentaries, or rational explications of it,
   to entertain your reason with: for, as soon as you do this; then,
   however true and good this mystery may be in itself, it is, with regard
   to you, of no better use than that very vain philosophy, and science
   falsely so called, condemned by the apostle. It will only be the same
   snare and delusion to you, that other learning and philosophy is to
   other people. For if there is nothing good or divine in you but the
   faith, and hope, and love, and desire of your heart turned to God; if
   nothing can do any good, be any blessing or happiness to this faith,
   and love, and desire turned to God, but only God himself in his holy
   being; and if nothing can communicate God to you, but God himself; and
   if God cannot communicate himself to you under a notion, or an idea of
   reason, but a degree of life, good, and blessing, born or brought to
   life in your soul; then you see, that to give yourself up to reasoning,
   and notional conceptions, is to turn from God, and wander out of the
   way of all divine communications.

   [Way-3-57] Academicus. But if it be strictly thus, Theophilus, had it
   not been better, that these deep matters had not been communicated to
   the world, since it is so natural to man to make a wrong use of them?

   [Way-3-58] Theophilus. This objection, Academicus, comes with the same
   strength against the scriptures themselves. For, excepting the seven
   thousands unknown in every age, as in the days of Elijah, and a few
   spiritual fathers and writers in almost every age of the church,
   bearing faithful witness to the truth and mysteries of religion, it
   must be said, that human learning, governed by human reason, hath, from
   age to age, to this very day, not only mistaken the true end and use of
   the scriptures, but hath turned them into an occasion of much evil and
   mischief. The scriptures speak only to the heart and conscience of man,
   not to amend or enlighten it with notions and opinions formed from the
   written letter of the Word; but solely to make the being and power of
   God known and adored, and to awaken in man a sensibility of his want of
   God; and to turn all the power, and strength, and will of the heart
   wholly to God, to receive light, and life, and rest, in his holy being.

   [Way-3-59] But to speak now directly to your objection: if I knew of
   any person, who stood in the faith and simplicity of the first
   Christians, free from all carnal adherence, or vain trust, to party
   notions, doctrines, and errors, brought forth by the contention of
   sects and churches; whose soul was dead to the earthly nature, and all
   the rudiments of this world, seeking only light, life, and salvation,
   from God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, living and dwelling in him,
   redeeming and sanctifying his whole body, soul, and spirit; to such a
   one I could freely say, this mystery was needless; as having all that
   already which this mystery would do for him. For its only end is, to
   bring man out of all the labyrinths of false and notional religion, to
   this very first state and simplicity of the gospel faith and life.

   [Way-3-60] And this may pass for a good reason why this mystery was not
   opened by God in the first ages of the church; since there was then no
   occasion for it. For religion began, and went on, rightly, in its own
   true way; it had the faith and heart of man; it stood in its own proper
   strength and glory, and was an awakened divine life of faith simply
   given up with joy and gladness to the mysteries of the gospel; not
   wanting any why's or wherefore's, because in the real possession of all
   the good, and blessing, and power, of every mystery of salvation.

   [Way-3-61] But seeing a worldly spirituality, called in the scripture
   the whore riding upon the beast, has had its thousand years in the
   church; since not only every kingdom, but almost every corner of
   Christendom, has a Babel of its own, built upon some rational
   interpretation of the letter of scripture; since learned reason, within
   the church, knows no other use of scriptures, but to reproach and
   condemn all other Babels, and to find materials to strengthen its own;
   since reason, without the church, finds it as easy to reproach and
   condemn all revelation, as it is to reproach all these Babels built
   upon it; since this is the finished confusion, brought forth by the
   reason and fleshly wisdom both of those that defend, and those that
   oppose the gospel; how adorable is the goodness of God in vouchsafing
   to these last ages of the world such a remedy (viz. the opening the
   ground and mystery of all things) as is suitable to the distressed and
   confused state of religion in the world! And how easy is it also to see
   the greatest reasons, why this remedy was not afforded sooner! For as
   true faith did not want it, and learned reason, whilst pleased with
   itself, could not be in a condition to receive it; so it was highly
   suitable to the goodness and wisdom of God, not to give forth this
   mystery, till reason, or fleshly wisdom, had made shipwreck of faith;
   and had so filled up the measure of its folly, as to stand in its last
   and highest state of distress, perplexity, and confusion. For any
   remedy is only then likely to be rightly received, when distress and
   perplexity makes the want of it to be sensibly felt.

   [Way-3-62] Let not therefore the genuine, plain, simple Christian, who
   is happy and blessed in the simplicity of gospel faith, take offense at
   this mystery, because he has no need of it. For it is God's goodness to
   the distressed state of the church, fallen from the life and power of
   gospel faith, and groaning under the slavery, darkness, and perplexity
   of bewildered reason and opinions.

   [Way-3-63] Neither let the orthodox divine, who sticks close to the
   phrases and sentiments of antiquity, reject this mystery as heretical,
   because it opens a ground of man, and the divine mysteries, not known
   or found in the primitive writers. For this is the very reason, why he
   should thankfully receive it with open arms, as having, and being that
   very thing, which the distressed divided state of the church now so
   greatly wants; and yet did not want, till it was fallen from its first
   simplicity of faith. For whilst faith and life defended the mysteries
   of religion, the ground and philosophy of it was not wanted. But when
   orthodoxy had given itself up to reason, and had nothing else for its
   support but reason and argument from the letter of scripture, without
   the least knowledge of the first ground of doctrines; then it could
   only be defended, as it is defended in every sect and division of the
   Christian world. For if reason will defend the mysteries of redemption,
   without knowing the true ground on which they stand, or why they must
   be as they are, from the nature of the thing; the more zealous and
   learned any man is, the more errors must he fall into in the defense of
   them. For the greater the strength is, that works without light, the
   more extravagancies it must produce. This is too visible in all the
   controversies that have risen in the church. Now, that learned reason,
   as presiding in the divinity schools, never yet had, nor could have,
   any knowledge of the ground of man, and the mysteries of redemption, is
   plain from this one generally received opinion of every age to this
   day; viz. that all things were created out of nothing. For this maxim
   entirely excludes all possibility of giving any account of the ground
   and reason of anything, either in the nature of man, or religion; and
   is the same thing as saying, that nothing has any ground or reason. For
   if that which begins to be comes out of nothing, it can only have the
   nature of that out of which it comes; and therefore can have no more
   said about it, why it is this or that, than can be said of that
   nothing, from whence it comes. And if the mystery, or life of the human
   nature, is out of nothing, has no reality of any antecedent ground in
   it, out of which it came to be such as it is, and to have that which it
   hath; then it is most certain, that all the mysteries of the religion
   of man must come forth from the same nothing, and have no antecedent
   ground from whence they come, that requires them to be as they are. For
   man, created out of nothing, cannot have a religion that is of any
   higher descent than himself, unless he is to have a religion that is
   quite unnatural to him. But a religion that has its ground in eternity,
   must be an unnatural religion to man that comes up in time, and out of
   nothing. If therefore you will hold man to be out of nothing, you must
   of all necessity hold all the mysteries of the religion of man to be
   also out of nothing; and that therefore no possible account can be
   given either of the ground of man, or his religion, or why there can be
   either right or wrong, good or evil, in either of them.

   [Way-3-64] Hence you may see why the truth has always suffered in every
   controversy of the church: thus, if you begin with that of St. Austin
   and Pelagius, about the freedom of the human will; do but suppose, what
   is fact, that they both of them held the human will to be created out
   of nothing; and then you need not wonder at that number of volumes and
   systems of errors, which this dispute has brought forth. For who can
   say, what the will is, or is not; what nature or power it must have, if
   it is created out of nothing? Whereas, if either of these disputants
   had known, from a true ground, what the human will is; that it cannot
   be a made thing, much less made out of nothing; but that the will of
   angel or man is the eternal uncreated will become creaturely, as a true
   direct birth from the divine will, descended from it, born out of it,
   and from thence come into a creaturely state; then they had known, that
   the will of angel or man must have the nature and freedom of the
   eternal will; and that its freedom not only consisted in its
   self-motion, but chiefly and most gloriously in this, that it could
   neither receive, nor have, nor be anything, as to its happiness or
   misery, but according to its own working: and then all that
   predestinarian learning of decrees. that has tormented the church ever
   since the time of St. Austin, had been prevented.

   [Way-3-65] Look next at the Socinian controversy. The Socinians, and
   their opponents, met in the field of reason, to debate about the fall,
   original sin, its guilt, the vindictive wrath of God, and the necessity
   of the incarnation, sufferings, death, and satisfaction, of Christ.
   These were the great points to be tried at the bar of reason. Now all
   these disputants stood upon the old ground; viz. that the soul of man,
   as well as all other things, was created out of nothing. And therefore
   they all stood absolutely excluded from every possibility of touching
   the true ground or reason of any one doctrine in debate. For the soul,
   created out of nothing, leaves no room to affirm, or even to suppose,
   that anything can be affirmed of the ground and reason of Christian
   redemption. For surely, if the soul of man is created out of nothing,
   it may and must with as much sense be affirmed, that it may be redeemed
   by nothing; and he that affirms the one, can have no pretense to deny
   the other.

   [Way-3-66] Just the same may be said of the present controversy betwixt
   the Christians and infidels, concerning Christianity itself. You need
   not wonder, that so many learned volumes have had so little effect; or
   that the defenders of Christianity seem to lose ground, though the
   infidels, at the same time, get no advantage to their cause, but that
   of increasing their numbers. For as neither side can go any higher,
   than a creation out of nothing; so neither side can say anything from a
   true ground, either for or against the mysteries of the gospel. If
   therefore infidelity increases, it is not because it has got more
   light, sees further into the depths of nature, or stands upon a more
   rational ground; but merely because the vanity and blindness of the
   dispute has a natural tendency to beget indifference and infidelity in
   the hearts of men.

   [Way-3-67] Observe this proposition; viz. "In God we live and have our
   being." Now, how easy is it for anyone to see, that no one can say
   anything as to the ground and reasons of the mysteries of the gospel,
   either for or against them, till he can go to the bottom of this
   proposition, and plainly show, either how we do, or do not, live and
   move, and have our being in God! For the truth or falseness of every
   mystery of the Christian redemption plainly depends upon this matter.
   If the Christian therefore will speak to the purpose, in defense of the
   ground of the gospel; he must be able to show, that we so are in God,
   so have our life in him, as to prove, from thence, the ground, the
   necessity, and certainty, of the Christian means of redemption. On the
   other hand, the Deist cannot take one rational step, or have any true
   ground to stand upon, but so far as he can show, that we are not so
   from God, have not such a nature in and from him, do not so live and
   move in him, as to have any want or any fitness for that method of
   redemption, which the gospel teaches. But as neither side did this,
   though the one thing necessary to be done; so you also see, that
   neither side had any possibility of doing it. For the soul, created out
   of nothing, allows of no inquiry, whether anything of God be in it, or
   how it has its life in him, or stands related to him. It admits of no
   searching after any ground or reason of its good or evil, or how it
   must have its happiness or misery from the nature of the thing. For if
   the intelligent life itself must be supposed to come from no ground,
   but to be created out of nothing; then it is certain, that its good and
   evil, its happiness or misery, with everything else, must be supposed
   to have no ground or reason for being as it is, but to be created out
   of nothing; and may go again into nothing, just as the creator
   pleaseth.

   [Way-3-68] And now, sir, you may enough see, how all controversy, both
   within and without the church, has been so vain a thing. For reason was
   to support doctrines and mysteries, without the least knowledge of the
   ground on which they stood; and reason was to oppose them in the same
   ignorance. You see also, why in these last ages, where literal learning
   has made so great a figure, that the matter has only been made worse,
   and division and error more triumphant. For as the ground of the truths
   was still wanted, and nothing appealed to, but the letter and phrase of
   scripture; so the more artful and learned disputants were in reasoning
   and criticism, the more absurdities must be defended on both sides. Why
   is not the learned papist shocked at transubstantiation, or the
   Protestant at predestination and reprobation? It is because each of
   them have enough of the truth of reason, and the goodness of criticism,
   to draw the letter of scripture to his side. And this you may be
   assured of, that reason, and literal learning, have just as good eyes
   in every other religious matter, and will give just such an account of
   every other doctrine, when it comes into dispute, as the papist and
   Protestant have done in these two points. And the thing cannot be
   otherwise: as Deist and Christian both hold a creation out of nothing,
   they must both have only an arbitrary God, and arbitrary religion, that
   has no antecedent ground to stand upon, but is left to the arbitrary
   proof or reason of both of them. What thanks, therefore, are due to the
   goodness of God, for opening this great mystery of all things in our
   author, wherein the right and wrong, the true and false, in religion,
   is as manifest as anything can be to our senses! Let no one therefore
   take offense at the opening of this mystery, as if it brought anything
   new into religion; for it has nothing new in it; it alters no point of
   gospel-doctrine, nor adds anything to it, but only sets every article
   of the old Christian faith upon its true ground, and in such a degree
   of light, as, when seen, is irresistible. It disturbs no one, who is in
   possession of the truth, because it points at nothing, drives to
   nothing, but to the opening the heavenly life in the soul. It calls no
   man from any outward form of religion, as such; but only shows, that no
   outward form can have any good in it, but so far as it only means, and
   seeks, and helps, the renewed life of heaven in the soul. "A
   Christian," says he, "is of no sect, and yet in every sect"; a truth
   which all sects, as such, will dislike; and therefore a truth equally
   wanted to be known, and equally beneficial to all sects. For the chief
   hurt of a sect lies in this, that it takes itself to be necessary to
   the truth; whereas the truth is only then found, when it is known to be
   of no sect, but as free and universal as the goodness of God, and as
   common to all names and nations as the air and light of this world.

   [Way-3-69] Suffer me now, before we part, once more to repeat what I
   have so often said, that you would not receive this mystery as a system
   of rational notions; nor do with it, as the world has, for the most
   part, done with the Bible, only gather opinions of reason and
   speculation from it. For it opens no depth of nature or grace, but to
   help you to the heart and spirit of the returning prodigal son, and to
   show you the blindness and vanity of reason and opinions; and that
   truth can have no possible entrance into you, but so far as you die to
   your earthly nature. The gospel saith all this to you in the plainest
   words; and the mystery only shows you, that the whole system of the
   universe saith the same thing. To be a true student or disciple of the
   mystery, is to be a disciple of Christ; for it calls you to nothing but
   to the plain letter of the gospel; and wherever it enters, either into
   the height or depth of nature, it is only to confirm the truth of these
   words of Christ; viz. "He that followeth not me, walketh in darkness:
   and unless a man deny himself, and forsake all that he hath, he cannot
   be my disciple." This is the philosophy opened in this mystery. It is
   not to lead you after itself, but to compel you, by every truth of
   nature, to turn to Christ, as the one way, the one truth, the one life,
   and salvation of the soul; not as notionally apprehended, or
   historically known; but as experimentally found, living, speaking, and
   working, in your soul. Read as long or as much as you will of this
   mystery, it is all labor lost; if you intend anything else by it, or
   would be anything else from it, but a man dead to this world, that you
   may live unto God through Christ Jesus, in the power of faith, and the
   spirit of prayer. With these words upon our minds, my friends, let us
   now end this conversation.

   The End of the Third Dialogue.

   FINIS.
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.
