     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: The Works of James Arminius, Vol. 1
      Creator(s): Arminius, James (1560-1609)
          Rights: Public Domain
   CCEL Subjects: All; Theology;
      LC Call no: BX6195 .A65 1956
     LC Subjects:

                  Christian Denominations

                  Protestantism

                  Post-Reformation

                  Other Protestant denominations

                  Arminians. Remonstrants
     __________________________________________________________________

                          The Works Of James Arminius
     __________________________________________________________________

  Vol. 1

                              Orations Of Arminius
     __________________________________________________________________

ORATION I

  THE OBJECT OF THEOLOGY

   To Almighty God alone belong the inherent and absolute right, will, and
   power of determining concerning us. Since, therefore, it has pleased
   him to call me, his unworthy servant, from the ecclesiastical functions
   which I have for some years discharged in the Church of his Son in the
   populous city of Amsterdam, and to give me the appointment of the
   Theological Professorship in this most celebrated University, I
   accounted it my duty, not to manifest too much reluctance to this
   vocation, although I was well acquainted with my incapacity for such an
   office, which with the greatest willingness and sincerity I then
   confessed and must still acknowledge. Indeed, the consciousness of my
   own insufficiency operated as a persuasive to me not to listen to this
   vocation; of which fact I can cite as a witness that God who is both
   the Inspector and the Judge of my conscience. Of this consciousness of
   my own insufficiency, several persons of great probity and learning are
   also witnesses; for they were the cause of my engaging in this office,
   provided it were offered to me in a legitimate order and manner. But as
   they suggested, and as experience itself had frequently taught me, that
   it is a dangerous thing to adhere to one's own judgment with
   pertinacity and to pay too much regard to the opinion which we
   entertain of ourselves, because almost all of us have little
   discernment in those matters which concern ourselves, I suffered myself
   to be induced by the authority of their judgment to enter upon this
   difficult and burdensome province, which may God enable me to commence
   with tokens of his Divine approbation and under his propitious
   auspices.

   Although I am beyond measure cast down and almost shudder with fear,
   solely at the anticipation of this office and its duties, yet I can
   scarcely indulge in a doubt of Divine approval and support when my mind
   attentively considers, what are the causes on account of which this
   vocation was appointed, the manner in which it is committed to
   execution, and the means and plans by which it is brought to a
   conclusion. From all these considerations, I feel a persuasion that it
   has been Divinely instituted and brought to perfection.

   For this cause I entertain an assured hope of the perpetual presence of
   Divine assistance; and, with due humility of mind, I venture in God's
   holy name to take this charge upon me and to enter upon its duties. I
   most earnestly beseech all and each of you, and if the benevolence
   which to the present time you have expressed towards me by many and
   most signal tokens will allow such a liberty, I implore, nay, (so
   pressing is my present necessity,) I solemnly conjure you, to unite
   with me in ardent wishes and fervent intercessions before God, the
   Father of lights, that, ready as I am out of pure affection to
   contribute to your profit, he may be pleased graciously to supply his
   servant with the gifts which are necessary to the proper discharge of
   these functions, and to bestow upon me his benevolent favour, guidance
   and protection, through the whole course of this vocation.

   But it appears to me, that I shall be acting to some good purpose, if,
   at the commencement of my office, I offer some general remarks on
   Sacred Theology, by way of preface, and enter into an explanation of
   its extent, dignity and excellence. This discourse will serve yet more
   and more to incite the mind, of students, who profess themselves
   dedicated to the service of this Divine wisdom, fearlessly to proceed
   in the career upon which they have entered, diligently to urge on their
   progress and to keep up an unceasing contest till they arrive at its
   termination. Thus may they hereafter become the instruments of God unto
   salvation in the Church of his Saints, qualified and fitted for the
   sanctification of his divine name, and formed "for the edifying of the
   body of Christ," in the Spirit. When I have effected this design, I
   shall think, with Socrates, that in such an entrance on my duties I
   have discharged no inconsiderable part of them to some good effect. For
   that wisest of the Gentiles was accustomed to say, that he had properly
   accomplished his duty of teaching, when he had once communicated an
   impulse to the minds of his hearers and had inspired them with an
   ardent desire of learning. Nor did he make this remark without reason.
   For, to a willing man, nothing is difficult, especially when God has
   promised the clearest revelation of his secrets to those "who shall
   meditate on his law day and night." (Psalm i. 2.) In such a manner does
   this promise of God act, that, on those matters which far surpass the
   capacity of the human mind, we may adopt the expression of Isocrates,
   If thou be desirous of receiving instruction, thou shalt learn many
   things."

   This explanation will be of no small service to myself. For in the very
   earnest recommendation of this study which I give to others, I
   prescribe to myself a law and rule by which I ought to walk in its
   profession; and an additional necessity is thus imposed on me of
   conducting myself in my new office with holiness and modesty, and in
   all good conscience; that, in case I should afterwards turn aside from
   the right path, (which may our gracious God prevent,) such a solemn
   recommendation of this study may be cast in my face to my shame.

   In the discussion of this subject, I do not think it necessary to utter
   any protestation before professors most learned in Jurisprudence, most
   skillful in Medicine, most subtle in Philosophy, and most erudite in
   the languages. Before such learned persons I have no need to enter into
   any protestation, for the purpose of removing from myself a suspicion
   of wishing to bring into neglect or contempt that particular study
   which each of them cultivates. For to every kind of study in the most
   noble theater of the sciences, I assign, as it becomes me, its due
   place, and that an honourable one; and each being content with its
   subordinate station, all of them with the greatest willingness concede
   the president's throne to that science of which I am now treating.

   I shall adopt that plain and simple species of oratory which, according
   to Euripides, belongs peculiarly to truth. I am not ignorant that some
   resemblance and relation ought to exist between an oration and the
   subjects that are discussed in it; and therefore, that a certain divine
   method of speech is required when we attempt to speak on divine things
   according to their dignity. But I choose plainness and simplicity,
   because Theology needs no ornament, but is content to be taught, and
   because it is out of my power to make an effort towards acquiring a
   style that may be in any degree worthy of such a subject.

   In discussing the dignity and excellence of sacred Theology, I shall
   briefly confine it within four titles. In imitation of the method which
   obtains in human sciences, that are estimated according to the
   excellence of their OBJECT, their AUTHOR, and their END, and of the
   IMPORTANCE of the reasons by which each of them is supported--I shall
   follow the same plan, speaking, first, of The OBJECT of Theology, then
   of its AUTHOR, afterwards of its END, and lastly, of its CERTAINTY.

   I pray God, that the grace of his Holy Spirit may be present with me
   while I am speaking; and that he would be pleased to direct my mind,
   mouth and tongue, in such a manner as to enable me to advance those
   truths which are holy, worthy of our God, and salutary to you his
   creatures, to the glory of his name and for the edification of his
   Church.

   I intreat you also, my most illustrious and polite hearers, kindly to
   grant me your attention for a short time while I endeavour to explain
   matters of the greatest importance; and while your observation is
   directed to the subject in which I shall exercise myself, you will have
   the goodness to regard IT, rather than any presumed SKILL in my manner
   of treating it. The nature of his great subject requires us, at this
   hour especially, to direct our attention, in the first instance, to the
   Object of Theology. For the objects of sciences are so intimately
   related, and so essential to them, as to give them their appellations.

   But God is himself the Object of Theology. The very term indicates as
   much: for Theology signifies a discourse or reasoning concerning God.
   This is likewise indicated by the definition which the Apostle gives of
   this science, when he describes it as "the truth which is after
   godliness." (Tit. i. 1.) The Greek word here used for godliness, is
   eusebeia signifying a worship due to God alone, which the Apostle shews
   in a manner of greater clearness, when he calls this piety by the more
   exact term qeosebeia. All other sciences have their objects, noble
   indeed, and worthy to engage the notice of the human mind, and in the
   contemplation of which much time, leisure and diligence may be
   profitably occupied.

  In General Metaphysics, the object of study is, "BEING"

   But let us consider the conditions that are generally employed to
   commend the object of any science. That OBJECT is most excellent (1.)
   which is in itself the best, and the greatest, and immutable; (2.)
   which, in relation to the mind, is most lucid and clear, and most
   easily proposed and unfolded to the view of the mental powers; and (3.)
   which is likewise able, by its action on the mind, completely to fill
   it, and to satisfy its infinite desires. These three conditions are in
   the highest degree discovered in God, and in him alone, who is the
   subject of theological study.

   1. He is the best being; he is the first and chief good, and goodness
   itself; he alone is good, as good as goodness itself; as ready to
   communicate, as it is possible for him to be communicated: his
   liberality is only equaled by the boundless treasures which he
   possesses, both of which are infinite and restricted only by the
   capacity of the recipient, which he appoints as a limit and measure to
   the goodness of his nature and to the communication of himself. He is
   the greatest Being, and the only great One; for he is able to subdue to
   his sway even nothing itself, that it may become capable of divine good
   by the communication of himself. "He calleth those things which are
   not, as though they were," (Rom. iv. 17) and in that manner, by his
   word, he places them in the number of beings, although it is out of
   darkness that they have received his commands to emerge and to come
   into existence. "All nations before him are as nothing, the inhabitants
   thereof are as grasshoppers, and the princes nothing." (Isa. xl. 17,
   22, 23.) The whole of this system of heaven and earth appears scarcely
   equal to a point "before him, whose center is every where, but whose
   circumference is no where." He is immutable, always the same, and
   endureth forever; "his years have no end." (Psalm 102)

   Nothing can be added to him, and nothing can be taken from him; with
   him "is no variableness, neither shadow of turning." (James i. 17.)
   Whatsoever obtains stability for a single moment, borrows it from him,
   and receives it of mere grace. Pleasant, therefore, and most delightful
   is it to contemplate him, on account of his goodness; it is glorious in
   consideration of his greatness; and it is sure, in reference to his
   immutability.

   2. He is most resplendent and bright; he is light itself, and becomes
   an object of most obvious perception to the mind, according to this
   expression of the apostle, That they should seek the Lord, if haply
   they might feel after him, and find Him, though he be not far from
   every one of us; for in him we live, and move, and have our being; for
   we are also his offspring:" (Acts xvii. 27, 28.) And according to
   another passage, "God left not himself without witness, in that he did
   good, and gave us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our
   hearts with food and gladness." (Acts xiv. 17.) Being supported by
   these true sayings, I venture to assert, that nothing can be seen or
   truly known in any object, except in it we have previously seen and
   known God himself.

   In the first place he is called "Being itself," because he offers
   himself to the understanding as an object of knowledge. But all beings,
   both visible and invisible, corporeal and incorporeal, proclaim aloud
   that they have derived the beginning of their essence and condition
   from some other than themselves, and that they have not their own
   proper existence till they have it from another. All of them utter
   speech, according to the saying of the Royal Prophet:

   "The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament showeth his
   handy-work." (Psalm xix. 1.) That is, the firmament sounds aloud as
   with a trumpet, and proclaims, that it is "the work of the right hand
   of the Most High." Among created objects, you may discover many tokens
   indicating "that they derive from some other source whatever they
   themselves possess," mere strongly than "that they have an existence in
   the number and scale of beings." Nor is this matter of wonder, since
   they are always nearer to nothing than to their Creator, from whom they
   are removed to a distance that is infinite, and separated by infinite
   space: while, by properties that are only finite, they are
   distinguished from nothing, the primeval womb from whence they sprung,
   and into which they may fall back again; but they can never be raised
   to a divine equality with God their maker. Therefore, it was rightly
   spoken by the ancient heathens,

   "Of Jove all things are full."

   3. He alone can completely fill the mind, and satisfy its (otherwise)
   insatiable desires. For he is infinite in his essence, his wisdom,
   power, and goodness. He is the first and chief verity, and truth itself
   in the abstract. But the human mind is finite in nature, the substance
   of which it is formed; and only in this view is it a partaker of
   infinity--because it apprehends Infinite Being and the Chief Truth,
   although it is incapable of comprehending them. David, therefore, in an
   exclamation of joyful self-gratulation, openly confesses, that he was
   content with the possession of God alone, who by means of knowledge and
   love is possessed by his creatures. These are his words: "Whom have I
   in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire beside
   thee." (Psalm lxxiii. 25.)

   If thou be acquainted with all other things, and yet remain in a state
   of ignorance with regard to him alone, thou art always wandering beyond
   the proper point, and thy restless love of knowledge increases in the
   proportion in which knowledge itself is increased. The man who knows
   only God, and who is ignorant of all things else, remains in peace and
   tranquillity, and, (like one that has found "a pearl of great price,"
   although in the purchase of it he may have expended the whole of his
   substance,) he congratulates himself and greatly triumphs. This luster
   or brightness of the object is the cause why an investigation into it,
   or an inquiry after it, is never instituted without obtaining it; and,
   (such is its fullness,) when it has once been found, the discovery of
   it is always attended with abundant profit.

   But we must consider this object more strictly; for we treat of it in
   reference to its being the object of our theology, according to which
   we have a knowledge of God in this life. We must therefore clothe it in
   a certain mode, and invest it in a formal manner, as the logical phrase
   is; and thus place it as a foundation to our knowledge.

   Three Considerations of this matter offer themselves to our notice: The
   First is, that we cannot receive this object in the infinity of its
   nature; our necessity, therefore, requires it to be proposed in a
   manner that is accommodated to our capacity. The Second is, that it is
   not proper, in the first moment of revelation, for such a large measure
   to be disclosed and manifested by the light of grace, as may be
   received into the human mind when it is illuminated by the light of
   glory, and, (by that process,) enlarged to a greater capacity: for by a
   right use of the knowledge of grace, we must proceed upwards, (by the
   rule of divine righteousness,) to the more sublime knowledge of glory,
   according to that saying, "To him that hath shall be given." The Third
   is, that this object is not laid before our theology merely to be
   known, but, when known, to be worshipped. For the Theology which
   belongs to this world, is Practical and through Faith:

   Theoretical Theology belongs to the other world, and consists of pure
   and unclouded vision, according to the expression of the apostle, "We
   walk by faith, and not by sight;" (2 Cor. v. 7,) and that of another
   apostle, "Then shall we be like him, for we shall see him as he is." (1
   John iii. 2.) For this reason, we must clothe the object of our
   theology in such a manner as may enable it to incline us to worship
   God, and fully to persuade and win us over to that practice.

   This last design is the line and rule of this formal relation according
   to which God becomes the subject of our Theology.

   But that man may be induced, by a willing obedience and humble
   submission of the mind, to worship God, it is necessary for him to
   believe, from a certain persuasion of the heart: (1.) That it is the
   will of God to be worshipped, and that worship is due to him. (2.) That
   the worship of him will not be in vain, but will be recompensed with an
   exceedingly great reward. (3.) That a mode of worship must be
   instituted according to his command. To these three particulars ought
   to be added, a knowledge of the mode prescribed.

   Our Theology, then, delivers three things concerning this object, as
   necessary and sufficient to be known in relation to the preceding
   subjects of belief. The First is concerning the nature of God. The
   Second concerning his actions. And the Third concerning his will.

   (1.) Concerning his nature; that it is worthy to receive adoration, on
   account of its justice; that it is qualified to form a right judgment
   of that worship, on account of its wisdom; and that it is prompt and
   able to bestow rewards, on account of its goodness and the perfection
   of its own blessedness.

   (2.) Two actions have been ascribed to God for the same purpose; they
   are Creation and Providence. (i.) The Creation of all things, and
   especially of man after God's own image; upon which is founded his
   sovereign authority over man, and from which is deduced the right of
   requiring worship from man and enjoining obedience upon him, according
   to that very just complaint of God by Malachi, "If then I be a father,
   where is mine honour? and if I be a master, were is my fear," (i, 6.)
   (ii.) That Providence is to be ascribed to God by which he governs all
   things, and according to which he exercises a holy, just, and wise care
   and oversight over man himself and those things which relate to him,
   but chiefly over the worship and obedience which he is bound to render
   to his God.

   (3.) Lastly, it treats of the will of God expressed in a certain
   covenant into which he has entered with man, and which consists of two
   parts: (i.) The one, by which he declares it to be his pleasure to
   receive adoration from man, and at the same time prescribes the mode of
   performing that worship; for it is his will to be worshipped from
   obedience, and not at the option or discretion of man. (ii.) The other,
   by which God promises that he will abundantly compensate man for the
   worship which he performs; requiring not only adoration for the
   benefits already conferred upon man, as a trial of his gratitude; but
   likewise that He may communicate to man infinitely greater things to
   the consummation of his felicity. For as he occupied the first place in
   conferring blessings and doing good, because that high station was his
   due, since man was about to be called into existence among the number
   of creatures; so likewise it is his desire that the last place in doing
   good be reserved for him, according to the infinite perfection of his
   goodness and blessedness, who is the fountain of good and the extreme
   boundary of happiness, the Creator and at the same time the Glorifier
   of his worshippers. It is according to this last action of his, that he
   is called by some persons "the Object of Theology," and that not
   improperly, because in this last are included all the preceding.

   In the way which has been thus compendiously pointed out, the infinite
   disputes of the schoolmen, concerning the formal relation by which God
   is the Object of Theology, may, in my opinion, be adjusted and decided.
   But as I think it a culpable deed to abuse your patience, I shall
   decline to say any more on this part of the subject.

   Our sacred Theology, therefore, is chiefly occupied in ascribing to the
   One True God, to whom alone they really belong, those attributes of
   which we have already spoken, his nature, actions, and will. For it is
   not sufficient to know, that there is some kind of a NATURE, simple,
   infinite, wise, good, just, omnipotent, happy in itself, the Maker and
   Governor of all things, that is worthy to receive adoration, whose will
   it is to be worshipped, and that is able to make its worshippers happy.
   To this general kind of knowledge there ought to be added, a sure and
   settled conception, fixed on that Deity, and strictly bound to the
   single object of religious worship to which alone those qualities
   appertain. The necessity of entertaining fixed and determinate ideas on
   this subject, is very frequently inculcated in the sacred page: "I am
   the Lord thy God." (Exod. xx. 2.) "I am the Lord and there is none
   else." (Isa. xlv. 5.) Elijah also says, "If the Lord be God, follow
   him; but if Baal, then follow him." (1 Kings xviii. 21.) This duty is
   the more sedulously inculcated in scripture, as man is more inclined to
   depart from the true idea of Deity. For whatever clear and proper
   conception of the Divine Being the minds the Heathens had formed, the
   first stumbling-block over which they fell appears to have been this,
   they did not attribute that just conception to him to whom it ought to
   have been given; but they ascribed it either, (1.) to some vague and
   uncertain individual, as in the expression of the Roman poet, "O
   Jupiter, whether thou be heaven, or air, or earth!" Or, (2) some
   imaginary and fabulous Deity, whether it be among created things, or a
   mere idol of the brain, neither partaking of the Divine nature nor any
   other, which the Apostle Paul, in his Epistle to the Romans and to the
   Corinthians, produces as a matter of reproach to the Gentiles. (Rom. 1,
   and 1 Corinthians 8.) Or (3,) lastly, they ascribed it to the unknown
   God; the title of Unknown being given to their Deity by the very
   persons who were his worshippers. The Apostle relates this crime as one
   of which the Athenians were guilty: But it is equally true when applied
   to all those who err and wander from the true object of adoration, and
   yet worship a Deity of some description. To such persons that sentence
   justly belongs which Christ uttered in conversation with the woman of
   Samaria: "Ye worship YE KNOW NOT WHAT." (John iv. 22.)

   Although those persons are guilty of a grievous error who transgress in
   this point, so as to be deservedly termed Atheists, in Scripture aqeoi
   "men without God;" yet they are by far more intolerably insane, who,
   having passed the extreme line of impiety, are not restrained by the
   consciousness of any Deity. The ancient heathens considered such men as
   peculiarly worthy of being called Atheists. On the other hand, those
   who have a consciousness of their own ignorance occupy the step that is
   nearest to sanity. For it is necessary to be careful only about one
   thing; and that is, when we communicate information to them, we must
   teach them to discard the falsehood which they had imbibed, and must
   instruct them in the truth alone. When this truth is pointed out to
   them, they will seize it with the greater avidity, in proportion to the
   deeper sorrow which they feel at the thought that they have been
   surrounded for a long series of years by a most pernicious error.

   But Theology, as it appears to me, principally effects four things in
   fixing our conceptions, which we have just mentioned, on that Deity who
   is true, and in drawing them away from the invention and formation of
   false Deities. First. It explains, in an elegant and copious manner,
   the relation in which the Deity stands, lest we should ascribe to his
   nature any thing that is foreign to it, or should take away from it any
   one of its properties. In reference to this, it is said, "Ye. heard the
   voice, but saw no similitude; take ye therefore good heed unto
   yourselves, lest you make you a graven image." (Deut. iv. 15, 16.)
   -Secondly. It describes both the universal and the particular actions
   of the only true God, that by them it may distinguish the true Deity
   from those which are fabulous. On this account it is said, "The gods
   that have not made the heavens and the earth, shall perish from the
   earth, and under these heavens." (Jer. x. 11.) Jonah also said, "I fear
   the Lord, the God of heaven, who hath made the sea and the dry land."
   (i, 9.) And the Apostle declares, "Forasmuch then as we are the
   offspring of God, we ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto
   gold, or silver, or stone, graven by art and by man's device:" (Acts
   xvii. 29.) In another passage it is recorded, "I am the Lord thy God
   which brought thee out of the land of Egypt;" (Deut. v. 6.) "I am the
   God that appeared to thee in Bethel." (Gen. xxvi. 13.) And, "Behold the
   days come, saith the Lord, that they shall no more say, The Lord
   liveth, which brought up the children of Israel out of the land of
   Egypt, but, The Lord liveth which brought up and which led the seed of
   the house of Israel out of the North Country," &c. (Jer. xxiii. 7, 8.)
   Thirdly. It makes frequent mention of the covenant into which the true
   Deity has entered with his worshippers, that by the recollection of it
   the mind of man may be stayed upon that God with whom the covenant was
   concluded. In reference to this it is said, "Thus shalt thou say unto
   the Children of Israel, the Lord God of your fathers, the God of
   Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath sent me unto you:
   this is my name for ever, and this is. my memorial unto all
   generations", (Exod. iii. 15.) Thus Jacob, when about to conclude a
   compact with Laban his father-in-law, swears "by the fear of his father
   Isaac." (Gen. xxxi. 53.) And when Abraham's servant was seeking a wife
   for his master's son, he thus invoked God, "O Lord God of my master
   Abraham!" (Gen. xxiv. 12.) Fourthly. It distinguishes and points out
   the true Deity, even by a most appropriate, particular, and individual
   mark, when it introduces the mention of the persons who are partakers
   of the same Divinity; thus it gives a right direction to the mind of
   the worshipper, and fixes it upon that God who is THE FATHER OF OUR
   LORD JESUS CHRIST. This was manifested with some degree of obscurity in
   the Old Testament, but with the utmost clearness in the New. Hence the
   Apostle says, "I bow my knee unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ."
   (Ephes. iii. 14.) All these remarks are comprehended and summed up by
   Divines, in this brief sentence, "That God must be invoked who has
   manifested himself in his own word." But the preceding observations
   concerning the Object of Theology, properly respect Legal Theology,
   which was accommodated to man's primeval state. For when man in his
   original integrity acted under the protecting favour and benevolence of
   a good and just God, he was able to render to God that worship which
   had been prescribed according to the law of legal righteousness, that
   says, "This do, and thou shalt live" he was able to "love with all his
   heart and soul" that Good and Just Being; he was able, from a
   consciousness of his integrity, to repose confidence in that Good and
   Just One; and he was able to evince towards him, as such, a filial
   fear, and to pay him the honour which was pleasing and due to him, as
   from a servant to his Lord. God also, on his part, without the least
   injury to his justice, was able to act towards man, while in that
   state, according to the proscript of legal righteousness, to reward his
   worship according to justice, and, through the terms of the legal
   covenant, and consequently "of debt," to confer life upon him. This God
   could do, consistency with his goodness, which required the fulfillment
   of the promise. There was no call for any other property of his nature,
   which might contribute by its agency to accomplish this purpose: No
   further progress of Divine goodness was necessary than that which might
   repay good for good, the good of perfect felicity, for the good of
   entire obedience: No other action was required, except that of
   creation, (which had then been performed,) and that of a preserving and
   governing providence, in conformity with the condition with which man
   was placed: No other volition of God was needed, than that by which he
   might both require the perfect obedience of the law and might repay
   that obedience with life eternal. In that state of human affairs,
   therefore, the knowledge of the nature described in those properties,
   the knowledge of those actions, and of that will, to which may be added
   the knowledge of the Deity to whom they really pertained, was necessary
   for the performance of worship to God, and was of itself amply
   sufficient.

   But when man had fallen from his primeval integrity through
   disobedience to the law, and had rendered himself "a child of wrath"
   and had become devoted to condemnations, this goodness mingled with
   legal justice could not be sufficient for the salvation of man. Neither
   could this act of creation and providence, nor this will suffice; and
   therefore this legal Theology was itself insufficient. For sin was to
   be condemned if men were absolved; and, as the Apostle says, (in the
   eighth chapter of his Epistle to the Romans,) "it could not be
   condemned by the law." Man was to be justified: but he could not be
   justified by the law, which, while it is the strength of sin, makes
   discovery of it to us, and is the procurer of wrath.

   This Theology, therefore, could serve for no salutary purpose, at that
   time: such was its dreadful efficacy in convincing man of sin and
   consigning him to certain death. This unhappy change, this unfavourable
   vicissitude of affairs was introduced by the fault and the infection of
   sin; which was likewise the cause why "the law which was ordained to
   life and honour," (Rom. vii. 10,) became fatal and destructive to our
   race, and the procurer of eternal ignominy. (1.) Other properties,
   therefore, of the Divine Nature were to be called into action; every
   one of God's benefits was to be unfolded and explained; mercy, long
   suffering, gentleness, patience, and clemency were to be brought forth
   out of the repository of his primitive goodness, and their services
   were to be engaged, if it was proper for offending man to be reconciled
   to God and reinstated in his favour. (2.) Other actions were to be
   exhibited: "Anew creation" was to be effected; "a new providence,"
   accommodated in every respect to this new creation, was to be
   instituted and put in force; "the work of redemption" was to be
   performed; "remission of sins" was to be obtained; "the loss of
   righteousness" was to be repaired; "the Spirit of grace" was to be
   asked and obtained; and a "lost salvation" restored. (3.) Another
   decree was likewise to be framed concerning the salvation of man; and
   another covenant, a new one," was to be made with him, "not according
   to that former one, because those" who were parties on one side "had
   not continued in that covenant:" (Heb. viii. 11,) but, by another and a
   gracious will, they "were to be sanctified" who might be "consecrated
   to enter into the Holiest by a new and living way." (Heb. x. 20.) All
   these things were to be prepared and laid down as foundations to the
   new manifestation.

   Another revelation, therefore, and a different species of Theology,
   were necessary to make known those properties of the Divine Nature,
   which we have described, and which were most wisely employed in
   repairing our salvation; to proclaim the actions which were exhibited;
   and to occupy themselves in explaining that decree and new covenant
   which we have mentioned.

   But since God, the punisher and most righteous avenger of sinners, was
   either unwilling, or, (through the opposition made by the justice and
   truth which had been originally manifested in the law,) was unable to
   unfold those properties of his nature, to produce those actions, or to
   make that decree, except by the intervention of a Mediator, in whom,
   without the least injury to his justice and truth, he might unfold
   those properties, perform those actions, might through them produce
   those necessary benefits, and might conclude that most gracious decree;
   on this account a Mediator was to be ordained, who, by his blood, might
   atone for sinners, by his death might expiate the sin of mankind, might
   reconcile the wicked to God, and might save them from his impending
   anger; who might set forth and display the mercy, long suffering and
   patience of God, might provide eternal redemption, obtain remission of
   sin, bring in an everlasting righteousness, procure the Spirit of
   grace, confirm the decree of gracious mercy, ratify the new covenant by
   his blood, recover eternal salvation, and who might bring to God those
   that were to be ultimately saved.

   A just and merciful God, therefore, did appoint as Mediator, his
   beloved Son, Jesus Christ. He obediently undertook that office which
   was imposed on him by the Father, and courageously executed it; nay, he
   is even now engaged in executing it. He was, therefore, ordained by God
   as the Redeemer, the saviour, the King, and, (under God,) the Head of
   the heirs of salvation. It would have been neither just nor reasonable,
   that he who had undergone such vast labours, and endured such great
   sorrows, who had performed so many miracles, and who had obtained
   through his merits so many benefits for us, should ingloriously remain
   among us in meanness and obscurity, and should be dismissed by us
   without honour. It was most equitable, that he should in return be
   acknowledged, worshipped, and invoked, and that he should receive those
   grateful thanks which are due to him for his benefits.

   But how shall we be able to adore, worship and invoke him, unless "we
   believe on him? How can we believe in him, unless we hear of him? And
   how can we hear concerning him," except he be revealed to us by the
   word? (Rom. x. 14.) From this cause, then, arose the necessity of
   making a revelation concerning Jesus Christ; and on this account two
   objects, (that is, God and his Christ,) are to be placed as a
   foundation to that Theology which will sufficiently contribute towards
   the salvation of sinners, according to the saying of our saviour
   Christ: "And this is life eternal, that they might know thee, the only
   true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." (John xvii. 3.)
   Indeed, these two objects are not of such a nature as that the one may
   be separated from the other, or that the one may be collaterally joined
   to the other; but the-latter of them is, in a proper and suitable
   manner, subordinate to the former. Here then we have a Theology, which,
   from Christ, its object, is most rightfully and deservedly termed
   Christian, which is manifested not by the Law, but in the earliest ages
   by promise, and in these latter days by the Gospel, which is called
   that "of Jesus Christ," although the words (Christian and Legal) are
   sometimes confounded. But let us consider the union and the
   subordination of both these objects.

   I. Since we have God and his Christ for the object of our Christian
   Theology, the manner in which Legal Theology explains God unto us, is
   undoubtedly much amplified by this addition, and our Theology is thus
   infinitely ennobled above that which is legal.

   For God has unfolded in Christ all his own goodness. "For it pleased
   the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell;" (Col. i. 19,) and
   that the "fullness of the Godhead should dwell in him," not by
   adumbration or according to the shadow, but "bodily:" For this reason
   he is called "the image of the invisible God;" (Col. i. 15,) "the
   brightness of his Father's glory, and the express image of his person,"
   (Heb. i. 3,) in whom the Father condescends to afford to us his
   infinite majesty, his immeasurable goodness, mercy and philanthropy, to
   be contemplated, beheld, and to be touched and felt; even as Christ
   himself says to Philip, "He that hath seen me, hath seen the Father."
   (John xiv. 9.) For those things which lay hidden and indiscernible
   within the Father, like the fine and deep traces in an engraved seal,
   stand out, become prominent, and may be most clearly and distinctly
   seen in Christ, as in an exact and protuberant impression, formed by
   the application of a deeply engraved seal on the substance to be
   impressed.

   1. In this Theology God truly appears, in the highest degree, the best
   and the greatest of Beings: (1.) The Best, cause he is not only
   willing, as in the former Theology, to communicate himself (for the
   happiness of men,) to those who correctly discharge their duty, but to
   receive into his favour and to reconcile to himself those who are
   sinners, wicked, unfruitful, and declared enemies, and to bestow
   eternal life on them when they repent. (2.) The Greatest, because he
   has not only produced all things from nothing, through the annihilation
   of the latter, and the creation of the former, but because he has also
   effected a triumph over sin, (which is far more noxious than nothing,
   and conquered with greater difficulty,) by graciously pardoning it, and
   powerfully putting it away;" and because he has "brought in everlasting
   righteousness," by means of a second creation, and a regeneration which
   far exceeded the capacity of "the law that acted as schoolmaster."
   (Gal. iii. 24.) For this cause Christ is called "the wisdom and the
   power of God," (1 Cor. i. 24,) far more illustrious than the wisdom and
   the power which were originally displayed in the creation of the
   universe. (3.) In this Theology, God is described to us as in every
   respect immutable, not only in regard to his nature but also to his
   will, which, as it has been manifested in the gospel, is peremptory and
   conclusive, and, being the last of all, is not to be corrected by
   another will. For "Jesus Christ is the same, yesterday, today, and
   forever"; (Heb. xiii. 8,) by whom God hath in these last days spoken
   unto us." (Heb. i. 2.) Under the law, the state of this matter was very
   different, and that greatly to our ultimate advantage. For if the will
   of God unfolded in the law had been fatal to us, as well as the last
   expression of it, we, of all men most miserable, should have been
   banished forever from God himself on account of that declaration of his
   will; and our doom would have been in a state of exile from our
   salvation. I would not seem in this argument to ascribe any mutability
   to the will of God. I only place such a termination and boundary to his
   will, or rather to something willed by him, as was by himself before
   affixed to it and predetermined by an eternal and peremptory decree,
   that thus a vacancy might be made for a "better covenant established on
   better promises" (Heb. vii. 22; viii, 6.)

   2. This Theology offers God in Christ as an object of our sight and
   knowledge, with such clearness, splendour and plainness, that we with
   open face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed
   into the same image from glory to glory even as by the Spirit of the
   Lord." (1 Cor. iii. 18.) In comparison with this brightness and glory,
   which was so pre-eminent and surpassing, the law itself is said not to
   have been either bright or glorious: For it "had no glory in this
   respect, by reason of the glory that excelleth." (2 Cor. iii. 8.) This
   was indeed "the wisdom of God which was kept secret since the world
   began :" (1 Cor. ii. 7; Rom. xvi. 25.) Great and inscrutable is this
   mystery; yet it is exhibited in Christ Jesus, and "made manifest" with
   such luminous clearness, that God is said to have been "manifest in the
   flesh" (1 Tim. iii. 16,) in no other sense than as though it would
   never have been possible for him to be manifested without the flesh;
   for the express purpose "that the eternal life which was with the
   Father, and the Word of life which was from the beginning with God,
   might be heard with our ears, seen with our eyes, and handled with our
   hands." (1 John i. 1, 2.)

   3. The Object of our Theology being clothed in this manner, so
   abundantly fills the mind and satisfies the desire, that the apostle
   openly declares, he was determined "to know nothing among the
   Corinthians save Jesus Christ, and him crucified." (1 Cor. ii. 2.) To
   the Phillipians he says, that he "counted all things but lost for the
   excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus; for whom he had suffered
   the loss of all things, and he counted them but dung that he might know
   Christ, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his
   sufferings." (Phil. iii. 8, 10.) Nay, in the knowledge of the object of
   our theology, modified in this manner, all true glorying and just
   boasting consist, as the passage which we before quoted from Jeremiah,
   and the purpose to which St. Paul has accommodated it, most plainly
   evince. This is the manner in which it is expressed: "Let him. that
   glorieth glory in this, that he understandeth and knoweth me, that I am
   the Lord which exercise lovingkindness, judgment and righteousness in
   the earth." (Jer. ix. 24.) When you hear any mention of mercy, your
   thoughts ought necessarily to revert to Christ, out of whom "God is a
   consuming fire" to destroy the sinners of the earth. (Deut. iv. 24;
   Heb. xii. 29) The way in which St. Paul has accommodated it, is this:

   "Christ Jesus is made unto us by God, wisdom, righteousness, and
   sanctification, and redemption; that, according as it is written, He
   that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord!"(1 Cor. i. 30, 31.) Nor is it
   wonderful, that the mind should desire to "know nothing save Jesus
   Christ," or that its otherwise insatiable desire of knowledge should
   repose itself in him, since in him and in his gospel "are hidden all
   the treasures of wisdom, and knowledge." (Col. ii. 3, 9.)

   II. Having finished that part of our subject which related to this
   Union, let us now proceed to the Subordination which subsists between
   these two objects. We will first inspect the nature of this
   subordination, and then its necessity:

   First. Its nature consists in this, that every saving communication
   which God has with us, or which we have with God, is performed by means
   of the intervention of Christ.

   1. The communication which God holds with us is (i.) either in his
   benevolent affection towards us, or, (ii.) in his gracious decree
   concerning us, or, (iii.) in his saving efficacy in us. In all these
   particulars, Christ comes in as a middle man between the parties. For
   (i.) when God is willing to communicate to us the affection of his
   goodness and mercy, he looks upon his Anointed One, in whom, as "his
   beloved, he makes us accepted, to the praise of the glory of his
   grace." (Ephes. i. 6.) (ii.) When he is pleased to make some gracious
   decree of his goodness and mercy, he interposes Christ between the
   purpose and the accomplishment, to announce his pleasure; for "by Jesus
   Christ he predestinates us to the adoption of children." (Ephes. i. 5.)
   (iii.) When he is willing out of this abundant affection to impart to
   us some blessing, according to his gracious decree, it is through the
   intervention of the same Divine person. For in Christ as our Head, the
   Father has laid up all these treasures and blessings; and they do not
   descend to us, except through him, or rather by him, as the Father's
   substitute, who administers them with authority, and distributes them
   according to his own pleasure.

   2. But the communication which we have with God, is also made by the
   intervention of Christ. It consists of three degrees -access to God,
   cleaving to him, and the enjoyment of him.

   These three particulars become the objects of our present
   consideration, as it is possible for them to be brought into action in
   this state of human existence, and as they may execute their functions
   by means of faith, hope, and that charity which is the offspring of
   faith.

   (1.) Three things are necessary to this access; (i.) that God be in a
   place to which we may approach; (ii.) that the path by which we may
   come to him be a high-way and a safe one; and (iii.) that liberty be
   granted to us and boldness of access. All these facilities have been
   procured for us by the mediation of Christ. (i.) For the Father
   dwelleth in light inaccessible, and sits at a distance beyond Christ on
   a throne of rigid justice, which is an object much too formidable in
   appearance for the gaze of sinners; yet he hath appointed Christ to be
   "apropitiation. through faith in his blood ;" (Rom. iii. 25,) by whom
   the covering of the ark, and the accusing, convincing, and condemning
   power of the law which was contained in that ark, are taken away and
   removed as a kind of veil from before the eyes of the Divine Majesty;
   and a throne of grace has been established, on which God is seated,
   "with whom in Christ we have to do." Thus has the Father in the Son
   been made euwrositov "easy of access to us." (ii.) It is the same Lord
   Jesus Christ who "hath not only through his flesh consecrated for us a
   new and living way," by which we may go to the Father, (Heb. x. 20,)
   but who is likewise "himself the way" which leads in a direct and
   unerring manner to the Father. (John xiv. 6.) (iii.) "By the blood of
   Jesus" we have liberty of access, nay we are permitted "to enter into
   the holiest," and even "within the veil whither Christ, as a High
   Priest presiding over the house of God and our fore runner, is entered
   for us,." (Heb. v. 20,) that "we may draw near with a true heart, in
   the sacred and full assurance of faith, (x, 22,) and may with great
   confidence of mind "come boldly unto the throne of grace." (iv, 16.)
   Have we therefore prayers to offer to God? Christ is the High Priest
   who displays them before the Father. He is also the altar from which,
   after being placed on it, they will ascend as incense of a grateful
   odour to God our Father. Are sacrifices of thanksgiving to be offered
   to God? They must be offered through Christ, otherwise "God will not
   accept them at our hands." (Mal. i. 10.) Are good works to be
   performed? We must do them through the Spirit of Christ, that they may
   obtain the recommendation of him as their author; and they must be
   sprinkled with his blood, that they may not be rejected by the Father
   on account of their deficiency.

   (2.) But it is not sufficient for us only to approach to God; it is
   likewise good for us to cleave to him. To confirm this act of cleaving
   and to give it perpetuity, it ought to depend upon a communion of
   nature. But with God we have no such communion. Christ, however,
   possesses it, and we are made possessors of it with Christ, "who
   partook of our flesh and blood." (Heb. ii. 14.) Being constituted our
   head, he imparts unto us of his Spirit, that we, (being constituted his
   members, and cleaving to him as "flesh of his flesh and bone of his
   bone,") may be one with him, and through him with the Father, and with
   both may become "one Spirit."

   (3.) The enjoyment remains to be considered. It is a true, solid and
   durable taste of the Divine goodness and sweetness in this life, not
   only perceived by the mind and understanding, but likewise by the
   heart, which is the seat of all the affections. Neither does this
   become ours, except in Christ, by whose Spirit dwelling in us that most
   divine testimony is pronounced in our hearts, that "we are the children
   of God, and heirs of eternal life." (Rom. viii. 16.) On hearing this
   internal testimony, we conceive joy ineffable, "possess our souls in
   hope and patience," and in all our straits and difficulties we call
   upon God and cry, Abba Father, with an earnest expectation of our final
   access to God, of the consummation of our abiding in him and our
   cleaving to him, (by which we shall have "all in all,") and of the most
   blessed fruition, which will consist of the clear and unclouded vision
   of God himself. But the third division of our present subject, will be
   the proper place to treat more fully on these topics.

   Secondly. Having seen the subordination of both the objects of
   Christian Theology, let us in a few words advert to its Necessity. This
   derives its origin from the comparison of our contagion and vicious
   depravity, with the sanctity of God that is incapable of defilement,
   and with the inflexible rigor of his justice, which completely
   separates us from him by a gulf so great as to render it impossible for
   us to be united together while at such a vast distance, or for a
   passage to be made from us to him--unless Christ had trodden the wine
   press of the wrath of God, and by the streams of his most precious
   blood, plentifully flowing from the pressed, broken, and disparted
   veins of his body, had filled up that otherwise impassable gulf, "and
   had purged our consciences, sprinkled with his own blood, from all dead
   works ;" (Heb. ix. 14, 22,) that, being thus sanctified, we might
   approach to "the living God and might serve him without fear, in
   holiness and righteousness before him, all the days of our life." (Luke
   i. 75.)

   But such is the great Necessity of this subordination, that, unless our
   faith be in Christ, it cannot be in God: The Apostle Peter says, "By
   him we believe in God, that raised him from the dead, and gave him
   glory; that your faith and hope might be in God." (1 Pet., i, 21.) On
   this account the faith also which we have in God, was prescribed, not
   by the law, but by the gospel of the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
   which is properly "the word of faith" and "the word of promise."

   The consideration of this necessity is of infinite utility, (i.) both
   in producing confidence in the consciences of believers, trembling at
   the sight of their sins, as appears most evidently from our preceding
   observations; (ii.) and in establishing the necessity of the Christian
   Religion. I account it necessary to make a few remarks on this latter
   topic, because they are required by the nature of our present purpose
   and of the Christian Religion itself.

   I observe, therefore, that not only is the intervention of Christ
   necessary to obtain salvation from God, and to impart it unto men, but
   the faith of Christ is also necessary to qualify men for receiving this
   salvation at his hands; not that faith in Christ by which he may be
   apprehended under the general notion of the wisdom, power, goodness and
   mercy of God, but that faith which was announced by the Apostles and
   recorded in their writings, and in such a saviour as was preached by
   those primitive heralds of salvation.

   I am not in the least influenced by the argument by which some persons
   profess themselves induced to adopt the opinion, "that a faith in
   Christ thus particular and restricted, which is required from all that
   become the subjects of salvation, agrees neither with the amplitude of
   God's mercy, nor with the conditions of his justice, since many
   thousands of men depart out of this life, before even the sound of the
   Gospel of Christ has reached their ears." For the reasons and terms of
   Divine Justice and Mercy are not to be determined by the limited and
   shallow measure of our capacities or feelings; but we must leave with
   God the free administration and just defense of these his own
   attributes. The result, however, will invariably prove to be the same,
   in what manner soever he may be pleased to administer those divine
   properties--for, "he will always overcome when he is judged." (Rom.
   iii. 4.) Out of his word we must acquire our wisdom and information. In
   primary, and certain secondary matters this word describes--the
   Necessity of faith in Christ, according to the appointment of the just
   mercy and the merciful justice of God. "He that believeth on the Son,
   hath everlasting life; and he that believeth not the Son, shall not see
   life; but the wrath of God abideth on him." (John iii. 36.) This is not
   an account of the first kindling of the wrath of God against this
   willful unbeliever; for he had then deserved the most severe
   expressions of that wrath by the sins which he had previously committed
   against the law; and this wrath "abides upon him," on account of his
   continued unbelief, because he had been favoured with the opportunity
   as well as the power of being delivered from it, through faith in the
   Son of God. Again: If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your
   sins." (John viii. 24.) And, in another passage, Christ declares, "This
   is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus
   Christ whom thou hast sent." (John xvii, 3.) The Apostle says, "It
   pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe."
   That preaching thus described is the doctrine of the cross, "to the
   Jews a stumbling block and unto the Greeks foolishness:

   But unto them which are called both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power
   of God and the wisdom of God:" (1 Cor. i. 21, 23, 24.) This wisdom and
   this power are not those attributes which God employed when he formed
   the world, for Christ is here plainly distinguished from them; but they
   are the wisdom and the power revealed in that gospel which is eminently
   "the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth." (Rom. i.
   16.) Not only, therefore, is the cross of Christ necessary to solicit
   and procure redemption, but the faith of the cross is also necessary in
   order to obtain possession of it.

   The necessity of faith in the cross does not arise from the
   circumstance of the doctrine of the cross being preached and propounded
   to men; but, since faith in Christ is necessary according to the decree
   of God, the doctrine of the cross is preached, that those who believe
   in it may be saved. Not only on account of the decree of God is faith
   in Christ necessary, but it is also necessary on account of the promise
   made unto Christ by the Father, and according to the Covenant which was
   ratified between both of them. This is the word of that promise: "Ask
   of me, and I will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance." (Psalm
   ii. 8.) But the inheritance of Christ is the multitude of the faithful;
   "the people, who, in the days of his power shall willingly come to him,
   in the beauties of holiness." (Psalm cx. 3.) "in thee shall all nations
   be blessed; so then they which be of faith are blessed with faithful
   Abraham." (Gal. iii. 8, 9 In Isaiah it is likewise declared, "When thou
   shalt make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed. He
   shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in
   his hands. He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be
   satisfied: by the knowledge of himself [which is faith in him] shall my
   righteous servant justify many; for he shall bear their iniquities."
   (Isa. liii. 10, 11.) Christ adduces the covenant which has been
   concluded with the Father, and founds a plea upon it when he says,
   "Father glorify thy Son; that thy Son also may glorify thee: as thou
   hast given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life
   to as many as thou hast given him. And this is life eternal," &c., &c.
   (John xvii. 1, 2, 3, 4.) Christ therefore by the decree, the promise
   and the covenant of the Father, has been constituted the saviour of all
   that believe on him, according to the declaration of the Apostle: "And
   being made perfect he became the author of eternal salvation, to all
   them that obey him." (Heb. v. 9.) This is the reason why the Gentiles
   without Christ are said to be "alien from the commonwealth of Israel,
   and strangers from the covenants of promise, having no hope, and
   without God in the world." Yet through faith "those who some time were
   thus afar off and in darkness" are said to be made nigh, and "are now
   light in the Lord." (Ephes. ii. 12, 13, and v, 8.) It is requisite,
   therefore, earnestly to contend for the Necessity of the Christian
   religion, as for the altar and the anchor of our salvation, lest, after
   we have suffered the Son to be taken away from us and from our Faith,
   we should also be deprived of the Father:

   "For whosoever denieth the Son, the same hath not the Father." (1 John
   ii. 23.) But if we in the slightest degree connive at the diminution or
   limitation of this Necessity, Christ himself will be brought into
   contempt among Christians, his own professing people; and will at
   length be totally denied and universally renounced. For it is not an
   affair of difficulty to take away the merit of salvation, and the power
   to save from Him to whom we are not compelled by any necessity to offer
   our oaths of allegiance. Who believes, that it is not necessary to
   return thanks to him who has conferred a benefit? Nay, who will not
   openly and confidently profess, that he is not the Author of salvation
   whom it is not necessary to acknowledge in that capacity. The union,
   therefore, of both the objects, God and Christ, must be strongly urged
   and enforced in our Christian Theology; nor is it to be endured that
   under any pretext they be totally detached and removed from each other,
   unless we wish Christ himself to be separated and withdrawn from us,
   and for us to be deprived at once of him and of our own salvation.

   The present subject would require us briefly to present to your sight
   all and each of those parts of which the consideration of this object
   ought to consist, and the order in which they should be placed before
   our eyes; but I am unwilling to detain this most famous and crowded
   auditory by a more prolix oration.

   Since, therefore, thus wonderfully great are the dignity, majesty,
   splendour and plenitude of Theology, and especially of our Christian
   Theology, by reason of its double object which is God and Christ, it is
   just and proper that all those who glory in the title of "men formed in
   the image of God," or in the far more august title of "Christians" and
   "men regenerated after the image of God and Christ, should most
   seriously and with ardent desire apply themselves to the knowledge of
   this Theology; and that they should think no object more worthy,
   pleasant, or useful than this, to engage their labourious attention or
   to awaken their energies. For what is more worthy of man, who is the
   image of God, than to be perpetually reflecting itself on its great
   archetype? What can be more pleasant, than to be continually irradiated
   and enlightened by the salutary beams of his Divine Pattern? What is
   more useful than, by such illumination, to be assimilated yet more and
   more to the heavenly Original? Indeed there is not any thing the
   knowledge of which can be more useful than this is, in the very search
   for it; or, when discovered, can be more profitable to the possessor.
   What employment is more becoming and honourable in a creature, a
   servant, and a son than to spend whole days and nights in obtaining a
   knowledge of God his Creator, his Lord, and his Father? What can be
   more decorous and comely in those who are redeemed by the blood of
   Christ, and who are sanctified by his Spirit, than diligently and
   constantly to meditate upon Christ, and always to carry him about in
   their minds, and hearts, and also on their tongues?

   I am fully aware that this animal life requires the discharge of
   various functions; that the superintendence of them must be entrusted
   to those persons who will execute each of them to the common advantage
   of the republic; and that the knowledge necessary for the right
   management of all such duties, can only be acquired by continued study
   and much labour. But if the very persons to whom the management of
   these concerns has been officially committed, will acknowledge the
   important principle--that in preference to all others, those things
   should be sought which appertain to the kingdom of God and his
   righteousness, (Matt. vi. 33,) they will confess that their ease and
   leisure, their meditations and cares, should yield the precedence to
   this momentous study. Though David himself was the king of a numerous
   people, and entangled in various wars, yet he never ceased to cultivate
   and pursue this study in preference to all others. To the benefit which
   he had derived from such a judicious practice, he attributes the
   portion of wisdom which he had obtained, and which was "greater than
   that of his enemies." (Psalm cxix. 98,) and by it also "he had more
   understanding than all his teachers." (99.) The three most noble
   treatises which Solomon composed, are to the present day read by the
   Church with admiration and thanksgiving; and they testify the great
   advantage which the royal author obtained from a knowledge of Divine
   things, while he was the chief magistrate of the same people on the
   throne of his Father. But since, according to the opinion of a Roman
   Emperor, "nothing is more difficult than to govern well" what just
   cause will any one be able to offer for the neglect of a study, to
   which even kings could devote their time and attention. Nor is it
   wonderful that they acted thus; for they addicted themselves to this
   profitable and pleasant study by the command of God; and the same
   Divine command has been imposed upon all and each of us, and is equally
   binding. It is one of Plato's observations, that "commonwealths would
   at length enjoy happiness and prosperity, either when their princes and
   ministers of state become philosophers, or when philosophers were
   chosen as ministers of state and conducted the affairs of government."
   We may transfer this sentiment with far greater justice to Theology,
   which is the true and only wisdom in relation to things Divine.

   But these our admonitions more particularly concern you, most excellent
   and learned youths, who, by the wish of your parents or patrons, and at
   your own express desire, have been devoted, set apart, and consecrated
   to this study; not to cultivate it merely with diligence, for the sake
   of promoting your own salvation, but that you may at some future period
   be qualified to engage in the eligible occupation, (which is most
   pleasing to God,) of teaching, instructing, and edifying the Church of
   the saints--"which is the body of Christ, and the fullness of him that
   filleth all in all." (Ephes. i. 23.) Let the extent and the majesty of
   the object, which by a deserved right engages all our powers, be
   constantly placed before your eyes; and suffer nothing to be accounted
   more glorious than to spend whole days and nights in acquiring a
   knowledge of God and his Christ, since true and allowable glories
   consists in this Divine knowledge. Reflect what great concerns those
   must be into which angels desire to look. Consider, likewise, that you
   are now forming an entrance for yourselves into a communion, at least
   of name, with these heavenly beings, and that God will in a little time
   call you to the employment for which you are preparing, which is one
   great object of my hopes and wishes concerning you.

   Propose to yourselves for imitation that chosen instrument of Christ,
   the Apostle Paul, whom you with the greater willingness acknowledge as
   your teacher, and who professes himself to be inflamed with such an
   intense desire of knowing Christ, that he not only held every worldly
   thing in small estimation when put in competition with this knowledge,
   but also "suffered the loss of all things, that he might win the
   knowledge of Christ." (Phil. iii. 8.) Look at Timothy, his disciple,
   whom he felicitates on this account--"that from a child he had known
   the holy scriptures." (2 Tim. iii. 15.) You have already attained to a
   share of the same blessedness; and you will make further advances in
   it, if you determine to receive the admonitions, and to execute the
   charge, which that great teacher of the Gentiles addresses to his
   Timothy.

   But this study requires not only diligence, but holiness, and a sincere
   desire to please God. For the object which you handle, into which you
   are looking, and which you wish to know, is sacred--nay, it is the holy
   of holies. To pollute sacred things, is highly indecent; it is
   desirable that the persons by whom such things are administered, should
   communicate to them no taint of defilement. The ancient Gentiles when
   about to offer sacrifice were accustomed to exclaim,

   "Far, far from hence, let the profane depart!"

   This caution should be re-iterated by you, for a more solid and lawful
   reason when you proceed to offer sacrifices to God Most High, and to
   his Christ, before whom also the holy choir of angels repeat aloud that
   thrice-hallowed song, "Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty!" While you
   are engaged in this study, do not suffer your minds to be enticed away
   by other pursuits and to different objects. Exercise yourselves,
   continue to exercise yourselves in this, with a mind intent upon what
   has been proposed to you according to the design of this discourse. If
   you do this, in the course of a short time you will not repent of your
   labour; but you will make such progress in the way of the knowledge of
   the Lord, as will render you useful to others. For "the secret of the
   Lord, is with them that fear him." (Psalm xxv. 14) Nay, from the very
   circumstance of this unremitting attention, you will be enabled to
   declare, that you "have chosen the good part which alone shall not be
   taken away from you," (Luke x. 42) but which will daily receive fresh
   increase. Your minds will be so expanded by the knowledge of God and of
   his Christ, that they will hereafter become a most ample habitation for
   God and Christ through the Spirit. I have finished.
     __________________________________________________________________

ORATION II

  THE AUTHOR AND THE END OF THEOLOGY

   They who are conversant with the demonstrative species of oratory, and
   choose for themselves any subject of praise or blame, must generally be
   engaged in removing from themselves, what very readily assails the
   minds of their auditors, a suspicion that they are impelled to speak by
   some immoderate feeling of love or hatred; and in showing that they are
   influenced rather by an approved judgment of the mind; and that they
   have not followed the ardent flame of their will, but the clear light
   of their understanding, which accords with the nature of the subject
   which they are discussing. But to me such a course is not necessary.
   For that which I have chosen for the subject of my commendation, easily
   removes from me all ground for such a suspicion.

   I do not deny, that here indeed I yield to the feeling of love; but it
   is on a matter which if any one does not love, he hates himself, and
   perfidiously prostitutes the life of his soul. Sacred Theology is the
   subject whose excellence and dignity I now celebrate in this brief and
   unadorned Oration; and which, I am convinced, is to all of you an
   object of the greatest regard. Nevertheless, I wish to raise it, if
   possible, still higher in your esteem. This, indeed, its own merit
   demands; this the nature of my office requires. Nor is it any part of
   my study to amplify its dignity by ornaments borrowed from other
   objects; for to the perfection of its beauty can be added nothing
   extraneous that would not tend to its degradation and loss of its
   comeliness. I only display such ornaments as are, of themselves, its
   best recommendation. These are, its Object, its Author, its End and its
   Certainty. Concerning the Object, we have already declared whatever the
   Lord had imparted; and we will now speak of its Author and its End. God
   grant that I may follow the guidance of this Theology in all respects,
   and may advance nothing except what agrees with its nature, is worthy
   of God and useful to you, to the glory of his name, and to the uniting
   of all of us together in the Lord. I pray and beseech you also, my most
   excellent and courteous hearers, that you will listen to me, now when I
   am beginning to speak on the Author, and the End of Theology, with the
   same degree of kindness and attention as that which you evinced when
   you heard my preceding discourse on its Object.

   Being about to treat of the Author, I will not collect together the
   lengthened reports of his well merited praises, for with you this is
   unnecessary. I will only declare (1.) Who the Author is; (2.) In what
   respect he is to be considered; (3.) Which of his properties were
   employed by him in the revelation of Theology; and (4.) In what manner
   he has made it known.

   I. We have considered the Object of Theology in regard to two
   particulars. And that each part of our subject may properly and exactly
   answer to the other, we may also consider its Author in a two-fold
   respect--that of Legal and of Evangelical Theology. In both cases, the
   same person is the Author and the Object, and the person who reveals
   the doctrine is likewise its matter and argument. This is a peculiarity
   that belongs to no other of the numerous sciences. For although all of
   them may boast of God, as their Author, because he a God of knowledge;
   yet, as we have seen, they have some other object than God, which
   something is indeed derived from him and of his production. But they do
   not partake of God as their efficient cause, in an equal manner with
   this doctrine, which, for a particular reason, and one entirely
   distinct from that of the other sciences, lays claim to God , its
   Author. God, therefore, is the author of Legal Theology; God and his
   Christ, or God in and through Christ, is the Author of that which is
   evangelical. For to this the scripture bears witness, and thus the very
   nature of the object requires, both of which we will separately
   demonstrate.

   1. Scripture describes to us the Author of legal theology before the
   fall in these words: "And the Lord God commanded the man, saying, Of
   every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat; but of the tree of the
   knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it:" (Gen. ii. 16,
   17.) A threat was added in express words, in case the man should
   transgress, and a promise, in the type of the tree of life, if he
   complied with the command. But there are two things, which, as they
   preceded this act of legislation, should have been previously known by
   man: (1.) The nature of God, which is wise, good, just, and powerful;
   (2.) The authority by which he issues his commands, the right of which
   rests on the act of creation. Of both these, man had a previous
   knowledge, from the manifestation of God, who familiarly conversed with
   him, and held communication with his own image through that Spirit by
   whose inspiration he said, "This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of
   my flesh." (Gen. ii. 23.) The apostle has attributed the knowledge of
   both these things to faith, and, therefore, to the manifestation of
   God. He speaks of the former in these words: "For he that cometh to God
   must have believed [so I read it,] that he is, and that he is a
   rewarder of them that diligently seek him." (Heb. xi. 6.) If a
   rewarder, therefore, he is a wise, good, just, powerful, and provident
   guardian of human affairs. Of the latter, he speaks thus: "Through
   faith we understand that the world was framed by the word of God, so
   that things which are seen were not made of things which do appear."
   (Heb. xi. 3.) And although that is not expressly and particularly
   stated of the moral law, in the primeval state of man; yet when it is
   affirmed of the typical and ceremonial law, it must be also understood
   in reference to the moral law. For the typical and ceremonial law was
   an experiment of obedience to the moral law, that was to be tried on
   man, and the acknowledgement of his obligation to obey the moral law.
   This appears still more evidently in the repetition of the moral law by
   Moses after the fall, which was specially made known to the people of
   Israel in these words: "And God spake all these words :" (Exod. xx. 1,)
   and "What nation is there so great that hath statutes and judgments so
   righteous as all this law, which I set before you this day," (Deut. iv.
   8.) But Moses set it before them according to the manifestation of God
   to him, and in obedience to his command, as he says: "The secret things
   belong unto the Lord our God; but those things which are revealed
   belong unto us and to our children forever, that we may do all the
   words of this law." (Deut. xxix. 29.) And according to Paul, "That
   which may be known of God, is manifest in them; for God hath shewed it
   unto them." (Rom. i. 19.)

   2. The same thing is evinced by the nature of the object. For since God
   is the Author of the universe, (and that, not by a natural and internal
   operation, but by one that is voluntary and external, and that imparts
   to the work as much as he chooses of his own, and as much as the
   nothing, from which it is produced, will permit,) his excellence and
   dignity must necessarily far exceed the capacity of the universe, and,
   for the same reason, that of man. On this account, he is said in
   scripture, "to dwell in the light unto which no man can approach," (1
   Tim. vi. 16,) which strains even the most acute sight of any creature,
   by a brightness so great and dazzling, that the eye is blunted and
   overpowered, and would soon be blinded unless God, by some admirable
   process of attempering that blaze of light, should offer himself to the
   view of his creatures: This is the very manifestation before which
   darkness is said to have fixed its habitation.

   Nor is he himself alone inaccessible, but, as the heavens are higher
   than the earth, so are his ways higher than our ways, and his thoughts
   than our thoughts." (Isa. lv. 9.) The actions of God are called "the
   ways of God," and the creation especially is called "the beginning of
   the way of God," (Prov. 8,) by which God began, as it were, to arise
   and to go forth from the throne of his majesty. Those actions,
   therefore, could not have been made known and understood, in the manner
   in which it is allowable to know and understand them, except by the
   revelation of God. This was also indicated before, in the term "faith"
   which the apostle employed. But the thoughts of God, and his will,
   (both that will which he wishes to be done by us, and that which he has
   resolved to do concerning us,) are of free disposition, which is
   determined by the divine power and liberty inherent in himself; and
   since he has, in all this, called in the aid of no counselor, those
   thoughts and that will are of necessity "unsearchable and past finding
   out." (Rom. xi. 33.) Of these, Legal Theology consists; and as they
   could not be known before the revelation of them proceeded from God, it
   is evidently proved that God is its Author.

   To this truth all nations and people assent. What compelled Radamanthus
   and Minos, those most equitable kings of Crete, to enter the dark cave
   of Jupiter, and pretend that the laws which they had promulgated among
   their subjects, were brought from that cave, at the inspiration of
   Deity? It was because they knew those laws would not meet with general
   reception, unless they were believed to have been divinely
   communicated. Before Lycurgus began the work of legislation for his
   Lacedaemonians, imitating the example of those two kings, he went to
   Apollo at Delphos, that he might, on his return, confer on his laws the
   highest recommendation by means of the authority of the Delphic Oracle.
   To induce the ferocious minds of the Roman people to submit to
   religion, Numa Pompilius feigned that he had nocturnal conferences with
   the goddess Aegeria. These were positive and evident testimonies of a
   notion which had preoccupied the minds of men, "that no religion except
   one of divine origin, and deriving its principles from heaven, deserved
   to be received." Such a truth they considered this, "that no one could
   know God, or any thing concerning God, except through God himself."

   2. Let us now look at Evangelical Theology. We have made the Author of
   it to be Christ and God, at the command of the same scriptures as those
   which establish the divine claims of Legal Theology, and because the
   nature of the object requires it with the greater justice, in
   proportion as that object is the more deeply hidden in the abyss of the
   divine wisdom, and as the human mind is the more closely surrounded and
   enveloped with the shades of ignorance.

   (1.) Exceedingly numerous are the passages of scripture which serve to
   aid and strengthen us in this opinion. We will enumerate a few of them:
   First, those which ascribe the manifestation of this doctrine to God
   the Father; Then, those which ascribe it to Christ. "But we" says the
   apostle, "speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom,
   which God ordained before the world unto our glory. But God hath
   revealed it unto us by his Spirit." (1 Cor. ii. 7,10.) The same apostle
   says, "The gospel and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the
   revelation of the mystery, which was kept secret since the world began,
   but now is made manifest by the scriptures of the prophets, according
   to the commandment of the everlasting God." (Rom. xvi. 25, 26.) When
   Peter made a correct and just confession of Christ, it was said to him
   by the saviour, "Flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my
   Father which is in heaven." (Matt. xvi. 17.) John the Baptist
   attributed the same to Christ, saying, "The only begotten Son, which is
   in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared God to us." (John i. 18.)
   Christ also ascribed this manifestation to himself in these words: "No
   man knoweth the Son but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father
   save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him." (Matt. xi.
   27.) And, in another place, "I have manifested thy name unto the men
   whom thou gavest me out of the world, and they have believed that thou
   didst send me." (John xvii. 6, 8.)

   (2.) Let us consider the necessity of this manifestation from the
   nature of its Object.

   This is indicated by Christ when speaking of Evangelical Theology, in
   these words: "No man knoweth the Son but the Father; neither knoweth
   any man the Father save the Son." (Matt. xi. 27.) Therefore no man can
   reveal the Father or the Son, and yet in the knowledge of them are
   comprised the glad tidings of the gospel. The Baptist is an assertor of
   the necessity of this manifestation when he declares, that "No man hath
   seen God at any time." (John i. 18.) It is the wisdom belonging to this
   Theology, which is said by the Apostle to be "hidden in a mystery,
   which none of the princes of this world knew, and which eye hath not
   seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it entered into the heart of man." (1
   Cor. ii. 7, 8, 9.) It does not come within the cognizance of the
   understanding, and is not mixed up, as it were, with the first notions
   or ideas impressed on the mind at the period of its creation; it is not
   acquired in conversation or reasoning; but it is made known "in the
   words which the Holy Ghost teacheth." To this Theology belongs "that
   manifold wisdom of God which must be made known by the Church unto the
   principalities and powers in heavenly places," (Ephes. iii. 10,)
   otherwise it would remain unknown even to the angels themselves. What!
   Are the deep things of God "which no man knoweth but the Spirit of God
   which is in himself," explained by this doctrine? Does it also unfold
   "the length and breadth, and depth and height" of the wisdom of God? As
   the Apostle speaks in another passage, in a tone of the most
   impassioned admiration, and almost at a loss what words to employ in
   expressing the fullness of this Theology, in which are proposed, as
   objects of discovery, "the love of Christ which passeth knowledge, and
   the peace of God which passeth all understanding." (Ephes. iii. 18.)
   From these passages it most evidently appears, that the Object of
   Evangelical Theology must have been revealed by God and Christ, or it
   must otherwise have remained hidden and surrounded by perpetual
   darkness; or, (which is the same thing,) that Evangelical Theology
   would not have come within the range of our knowledge, and, on that
   account, as a necessary consequence, there could have been none at all.

   If it be an agreeable occupation to any person, (and such it must
   always prove,) to look more methodically and distinctly through each
   part, let him cast the eyes of his mind on those properties of the
   Divine Nature which this Theology displays, clothed in their own
   appropriate mode; let him consider those actions of God which this
   doctrine brings to light, and that will of God which he has revealed in
   his gospel: When he has done this, (and of much more than this the
   subject is worthy,) he will more distinctly understand the necessity of
   the Divine manifestation.

   If any one would adopt a compendious method, let him only contemplate
   Christ; and when he has diligently observed that admirable union of the
   Word and Flesh, his investiture into office and the manner in which its
   duties were executed; when he has at the same time reflected, that the
   whole of these arrangements and proceedings are in consequence of the
   voluntary economy, regulation, and free dispensation of God; he cannot
   avoid professing openly, that the knowledge of all these things could
   not have been obtained except by means of the revelation of God and
   Christ.

   But lest any one should take occasion, from the remarks which we have
   now made, to entertain an unjust suspicion or error, as though God the
   Father alone, to the exclusion of the Son, were the Author of the legal
   doctrine, and the Father through the Son were the Author of the
   Evangelical doctrine--a few observations shall be added, that may serve
   to solve this difficulty, and further to illustrate the matter of our
   discourse. As God by his Word, (which is his own Son,) and by his
   Spirit, created all things, and man according to the image of himself,
   so it is likewise certain, that no intercourse can take place between
   him and man, without the agency of the Son and of the Holy Spirit. How
   is this possible, since the ad extra works of the Deity are
   indivisible, and when the order of operation ad extra is the same as
   the order of procession ad intra? We do not, therefore, by any means
   exclude the Son as the Word of the Father, and the Holy Ghost who is
   "the Spirit of Prophecy," from efficiency in this revelation.

   But there is another consideration in the manifestation of the gospel,
   not indeed with respect to the persons testifying, but in regard to the
   manner in which they come to be considered. For the Father, the Son,
   and the Holy Spirit, have not only a natural relation among themselves,
   but another likewise which derives its origin from the will; yet the
   latter entirely agrees with the natural relation that subsists among
   them. There is an internal procession in the persons; and there is an
   external one, which is called in the scriptures and in the writings of
   the Father, by the name of "Mission" or "sending." To the latter mode
   of procession, special regard must be had in this revelation. For the
   Father manifests the Gospel through his Son and Spirit. (i.) He
   manifests it through the Son, as to his being, sent for the purpose of
   performing the office of Mediator between God and sinful men; as to his
   being the Word made flesh, and God manifest in the flesh; and as to his
   having died, and to his being raised again to life, whether that was
   done in reality, or only in the decree and foreknowledge of God. (ii.)
   He also manifests it through his Spirit, as to his being the Spirit of
   Christ, whom he asked of his Father by his passion and his death, and
   whom he obtained when he was raised from the dead, and placed at the
   right hand of the Father.

   I think you will understand the distinction which I imagine to be here
   employed: I will afford you an opportunity to examine and prove it, by
   adducing the clearest passages of scripture to aid us in confirming it.
   (I.) "All things," said Christ, "are delivered to me of my Father; and
   no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the
   Father, save the Son." (Matt. xi. 27.) They were delivered by the
   Father, to him as the Mediator, "in whom it was his pleasure that all
   fullness should dwell." (Col. i. 19. See also ii, 9.) In the same sense
   must be understood what Christ says in John: "I have given unto them
   the words which thou gavest me;" for it is subjoined, "and they have
   known surely that I came out from thee, and they have believed that
   thou didst send me." (xvii, 8.) From hence it appears, that the Father
   had given those words to him as the Mediator: on which account he says,
   in another place, "He whom God hath sent, speaketh the words of God."
   (John iii. 34.) With this the saying of the Baptist agrees, "The law
   was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ." (John i.
   17.) But in reference to his being opposed to Moses, who accuses and
   condemns sinners, Christ is considered as the Mediator between God and
   sinners. The following passage tends to the same point: "No man hath
   seen God at any time: the only begotten Son which is in the bosom of
   the Father," [that is, "admitted," in his capacity of Mediator, to the
   intimate and confidential view and knowledge of his Father's secrets,]
   "he hath declared him:" (John i. 18.) "For the Father loveth the Son,
   and hath given all things into his hand;" (John iii. 35,) and among the
   things thus given, was the doctrine of the gospel, which he was to
   expound and declare to others, by the command of God the Father. And in
   every revelation which has been made to us through Christ, that
   expression which occurs in the beginning of the Apocalypse of St. John
   holds good and is of the greatest validity: "The revelation of Jesus
   Christ, which God gave unto him, to shew unto his servants." God has
   therefore manifested Evangelical Theology through his Son, in reference
   to his being sent forth by the Father, to execute among men, and in his
   name, the office of Mediator.

   (ii.) Of the Holy Spirit the same scripture testifies, that, as the
   Spirit of Christ the Mediator, who is the head of his church, he has
   revealed the Gospel. "Christ, by the Spirit," says Peter, "went and
   preached to the spirits in prison." (1 Pet. iii. 19.) And what did he
   preach? Repentance. This therefore, was done through his Spirit, in his
   capacity of Mediator, For, in this respect alone, the Spirit of God
   exhorts to repentance. This appears more clearly from the Same Apostle:
   "Of which salvation the prophets have inquired and searched diligently,
   who prophesied of the grace that should come unto you: searching what,
   or what manner of time, the Spirit of Christ which was in them did
   signify, when it testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the
   glory that should follow." And this was the Spirit of Christ in his
   character of Mediator and head of the Church, which the very object of
   the testimony foretold by him sufficiently evinces. A succeeding
   passage excludes all doubt; for the gospel is said in it, to be
   preached by the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven." (1 Pet. i. 12.) For
   he was sent down by Christ when he was elevated at the right hand of
   God, as it is mentioned in the second chapter of the Acts of the
   Apostles; which passage also makes for our purpose, and on that account
   deserves to have its just meaning here appreciated. This is its
   phraseology, "Therefore, being by the right hand of God exalted, and
   having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, he hath
   shed forth this, which ye now see and hear." (Acts ii. 33.) For it was
   by the Spirit that the Apostles prophesied and spoke in divers
   languages. These passages might suffice; but I cannot omit that most
   noble sentence spoken by Christ to console the minds of his disciples,
   who were grieving on account of his departure, "If I go not away the
   Comforter [or rather, the Advocate, who shall, in my place, discharge
   the vicarious office,' as Tertullian expresses himself;] If I go not
   away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will
   send him unto you. And when he is come he will reprove the world, &c.
   (John xvi. 7, 8.) He shall glorify me: For he shall receive of mine,
   and shall shew it unto you." Christ, therefore, as Mediator, "will send
   him," and he "will receive of that which belongs to Christ the
   Mediator. He shall glorify Christ," as constituted by God the Mediator
   and the Head of the Church; and he shall glorify him with that glory,
   which, according to the seventeenth chapter of St. John's Gospel ,
   Christ thought it necessary to ask of his Father. That passage brings
   another to my recollection, which may be called its parallel in merit:
   John says, "The Holy Ghost was not yet given; because that Jesus was
   not yet glorified." (vii, 39.) This remark was not to be understood of
   the person of the Spirit, but of his gifts, and especially that of
   prophecy. But Christ was glorified in quality of Mediator: and in that
   glorified capacity he sends the Holy Ghost; therefore, the Holy Spirit
   was sent by Christ as the Mediator. On this account also, the Spirit of
   Christ the Mediator is the Author of Evangelical Prophecy. But the Holy
   Ghost was sent, even before the glorification of Christ, to reveal the
   Gospel. The existing state of the Church required it at that period,
   and the Holy Spirit was sent to meet that necessity. "Christ is
   likewise the same yesterday, today and forever." (Heb. xiii. 8.) He was
   also "slain from the foundation of the world;" (Rev. xiii. 8,) and was,
   therefore, at that same time raised again and glorified; but this was
   all in the decree and fore-knowledge of God. To make it evident,
   however, that God has never sent the Holy Spirit to the Church, except
   through the agency of Christ the Mediator, and in regard to him, God
   deferred that plentiful and exuberant effusion of his most copious
   gifts, until Christ, after his exaltation to heaven, should send them
   down in a communication of the greatest abundance. Thus he testified by
   a clear and evident proof, that he had formerly poured out the gifts of
   the Spirit upon the Church, by the same person, as he by whom, (when
   through his ascension the dense and overcharged cloud of water above
   the heavens had been disparted,) he poured down the most plentiful
   showers of his graces, inundating and over spreading the whole body of
   the Church.

   III. But the revelation of Evangelical Theology is attributed to Christ
   in regard to his Mediatorship, and to the Holy Ghost in regard to his
   being the appointed substitute and Advocate of Christ the Mediator.
   This is done most consistently and for a very just reason, both because
   Christ, as Mediator, is placed for the ground-work of this doctrine,
   and because in the duty of mediation those actions were to be
   performed, those sufferings endured, and those blessings asked and
   obtained, which complete a goodly portion of the matters that are
   disclosed in the gospel of Christ. No wonder, therefore, that Christ in
   this respect, (in which he is himself the object of the gospel,) should
   likewise be the revealer of it, and the person who asks and procures
   all evangelical graces, and who is at once the Lord of them and the
   communicator. And since the Spirit of Christ, our Mediator and our
   head, is the bond of our union with Christ, from which we also obtain
   communion with Christ, and a participation in all his blessings--it is
   just and reasonable, that, in the respect which we have just mentioned,
   Christ should reveal to our minds, and seal upon our hearts, the
   evangelical charter and evidence of that faith by which he dwelleth in
   our hearts. The consideration of this matter exhibits to us (1.) the
   cause why it is possible for God to restrain himself with such great
   forbearance, patience, and long suffering, until the gospel is obeyed
   by those to whom it is preached; and (2.) it affords great consolation
   to our ignorance and infirmities.

   I think, my hearers, you perceive that this single view adds no small
   degree of dignity to our Evangelical Theology, beside that which it
   possesses from the common consideration of its Author. If we may be
   allowed further to consider what wisdom, goodness and power God
   expended when he instituted and revealed this Theology, it will give
   great importance to our proposition. Indeed, all kinds of sciences have
   their origin in the wisdom of God, and are communicated to men by his
   goodness and power. But, if it be his right, (as it undoubtedly is,) to
   appoint gradations in the external exercise of his divine properties,
   we shall say, that all other sciences except this, have arisen from an
   inferior wisdom of God, and have been revealed by a less degree of
   goodness and power. It is proper to estimate this matter according to
   the excellence of its object. As the wisdom of God, by which he knows
   himself, is greater than that by which he knows other things; so the
   wisdom employed by him in the manifestation of himself is greater than
   that employed in the manifestation of other things. The goodness by
   which he permits himself to be known and acknowledged by man as his
   Chief Good, is greater than that by which he imparts the knowledge of
   other things. The power also, by which nature is raised to the
   knowledge of supernatural things, is greater than that by which it is
   brought to investigate things that are of the same species and origin
   with itself. Therefore, although all the sciences may boast of God as
   their author, yet in these particulars, Theology, soaring above the
   whole, leaves them at an immense distance.

   But as this consideration raises the dignity of Theology, on the whole
   far above all other sciences, so it likewise demonstrates that
   Evangelical far surpasses Legal Theology; on which point we may be
   allowed, with your good leave, to dwell a little. The wisdom, goodness
   and power, by which God made man, after his own image, to consist of a
   rational soul and a body, are great, and constitute the claims to
   precedence on the part of Legal Theology. But the wisdom, goodness and
   power, by which "the Word was made flesh," (John i. 14,) and God was
   manifest in the flesh," (1 Tim. iii. 16,) and by which he "who was in
   the form of God took upon himself the form of a servant," (Phil. ii.
   7,) are still greater, and they are the claims by which Evangelical
   Theology asserts its right to precedence. The wisdom and goodness, by
   the operation of which the power of God has been revealed to salvation,
   are great; but that by which is revealed "the power of God to salvation
   to every one that believeth," (Rom. ii. 16,) far exceeds it. Great
   indeed are the wisdom and goodness by which the righteousness of God by
   the law is made manifest," and by which the justification of the law
   was ascribed of debt to perfect obedience; but they are infinitely
   surpassed by the wisdom and goodness through which the righteousness of
   God by faith is manifested, and through which it is determined that the
   man is justified "that worketh not, but [being a sinner,] believeth on
   him who justifieth the ungodly," according to the most glorious riches
   of his grace. Conspicuous and excellent were the wisdom and goodness
   which appointed the manner of union with God in legal righteousness,
   performed out of conformity to the image of God, after which man was
   created. But a solemn and substantial triumph is achieved through faith
   in Christ's blood by the wisdom and goodness, which, having devised and
   executed the wonderful method of qualifying justice and mercy, appoint
   the manner of union in Christ., and in his righteousness, "who is the
   brightness of his Father's glory and the express image of his person."
   (Heb. i. 3.) Lastly, it is the wisdom, goodness and power, which, out
   of the thickest darkness of ignorance brought forth the marvelous light
   of the gospel; which, from an infinite multitude of sins, brought in
   everlasting righteousness; and which, from death and the depths of
   hell, "brought life and immortality to light." The wisdom, goodness and
   power which have produced these effects, exceed those in which the
   light that is added to light, the righteousness that is rewarded by a
   due recompense, and the animal life that is regulated according to
   godliness by the command of the law, are each of them swallowed up and
   consummated in that which is spiritual and eternal.

   A deeper consideration of this matter almost compels me to adopt a more
   confident daring, and to give to the wisdom, goodness and power of God,
   which are unfolded in Legal Theology, the title of Natural," and as in
   some sense the beginning of the going forth of God towards his image,
   which is man, and a commencement of Divine intercourse with him. The
   others, which are manifested in the gospel, I fearlessly call
   "Supernatural wisdom, power and goodness," and "the extreme point and
   the perfect completion of all revelation;" because in the manifestation
   of the latter, God appears to have excelled himself, and to have
   unfolded every one of his blessings. Admirable was the kindness of God,
   and most stupendous his condescension in admitting man to the most
   intimate communion with himself--a privilege full of grace and mercy,
   after his sins had rendered him unworthy of having the establishment of
   such an intercourse. But this was required by the unhappy and miserable
   condition of man, who through his greater unworthiness had become the
   more indigent, through his deeper blindness required illumination by a
   stronger light, through his more grievous wickedness demanded
   reformation by means of a more extensive goodness, and who, the weaker
   he had become, needed a stronger exertion of power for his restoration
   and establishment. It is also a happy circumstance, that no aberration
   of ours can be so great, as to prevent God from recalling us into the
   good way; no fall so deep, as to disable him from raising us up and
   causing us to stand erect; and no evil of ours can be of such
   magnitude, as to prove a difficult conquest to his goodness, provided
   it be his pleasure to put the whole of it in motion; and this he will
   actually do, provided we suffer our ignorance and infirmities to be
   corrected by his light and power, and our wickedness to be subdued by
   his goodness.

   IV. We have seen that, (1.) God is the Author of Legal Theology; and
   God and his Christ, that of Evangelical Theology. We have seen at the
   same time (2.) in what respect God and Christ are to be viewed in
   making known this revelation, and (3.) according to what properties of
   the Divine Nature of both of them it has been perfected.

   We will now just glance at the Manner. The manner of the Divine
   manifestation appears to be threefold, according , the three
   instruments or organs of our capacity. (1.) The External Senses, (2.)
   The Inward Fancy or Imagination, and (3.) The Mind or Understanding.
   God sometimes reveals himself and his will by an image or
   representation offered to the external sight, or through an audible
   speech or discourse addressed to the ear. Sometimes he introduces
   himself by the same method to the imagination; and sometimes he
   addresses the mind in a manner ineffable, which is called Inspiration.
   Of all these modes scripture most clearly supplies us with luminous
   examples. But time will not permit me to be detained in enumerating
   them, lest I should appear to be yet more tedious to this most
   accomplished assembly.
     __________________________________________________________________

  THE END OF THEOLOGY

   We have been engaged in viewing the Author,: let us now advert to the
   End. This is the more eminent and divine according to the greater
   excellence of that matter of which it is the end. In that light,
   therefore, this science is far more illustrious and transcendent than
   all others; because it alone has a relation to the life that is
   spiritual and supernatural, and has an End beyond the boundaries of the
   present life: while all other sciences have respect to this animal
   life, and each has an End proposed to itself, extending from the center
   of this earthly life and included within its circumference. Of this
   science, then, that may be truly said which the poet declared
   concerning his wise friend, "For those things alone he feels any
   relish, the rest like shadows fly." I repeat it, "they fly away,"
   unless they be referred to this science, and firmly fix their foot upon
   it and be at rest. But the same person who is the Author and Object, is
   also the End of Theology. The very proportion and analogy of these
   things make such a connection requisite. For since the Author is the
   First and the Chief Being, it is of necessity that he be the First and
   Chief Good. He is, therefore, the extreme End of all things. And since
   He, the Chief Being and the Chief Good, subjects, lowers and spreads
   himself out, as an object to some power or faculty of a rational
   creature, that by its action or motion it may be employed and occupied
   concerning him, nay, that it may in a sense be united with him; it
   cannot possibly be, that the creature, after having performed its part
   respecting that object, should fly beyond it and extend itself further
   for the sake of acquiring a greater good. It is, therefore, of
   necessity that it restrain itself within him, not only as within a
   boundary beyond which it is impossible for it to pass on account of the
   infinitude of the object and on account of its own importance, but also
   as within its End and its Good, beyond which, because they are both the
   Chief in degree, it neither wishes nor is capable of desiring anything;
   provided this object be united with it as far as the capacity of the
   creature will admit. God is, therefore, the End of our Theology,
   proposed by God himself, in the acts prescribed in it; intended by man
   in the performance of those actions, and to be bestowed by God, after
   man shall have piously and religiously performed his duty. But because
   the chief good was not placed in the promise of it, nor in the desire
   of obtaining it, but in actually receiving it, the end of Theology may
   with the utmost propriety be called THE UNION OF GOD WITH MAN.

   But it is not an Essential union, as if two essences, (for instance
   that of God and man,) were compacted together or joined into one, or as
   that by which man might himself be absorbed into God. The former of
   these modes of union is prohibited by the very nature of the things so
   united, and the latter is rejected by the nature of the union. Neither
   is it a formal union, as if God by that union might be made in the form
   of man, like a Spirit united to a body imparting to it life and motion,
   and acting upon it at pleasure, although, by dwelling in the body, it
   should confer on man the gift of life eternal. But it is an objective
   union by which God, through the agency of his pre-eminent and most
   faithful faculties and actions, (all of which he wholly occupies and
   completely fills,) gives such convincing proofs of himself to man, that
   God may then be said to be "all in all." (1 Cor. xv. 21.) This union is
   immediate, and without any bond that is different to the limits
   themselves. For God unites himself to the understanding and to the will
   of his creature, by means of himself alone, and without the
   intervention of image, species or appearance. This is what the nature
   of this last and supreme union requires, as being that in which
   consists the Chief Good of a rational creature, which cannot find rest
   except in the greatest union of itself with God. But by this union, the
   understanding beholds in the clearest vision, and as if "face to face,"
   God himself, and all his goodness and incomparable beauty. And because
   a good of such magnitude and known by the clearest vision cannot fail
   of being loved on its own account; from this very consideration the
   will embraces it with a more intense love, in proportion to the greater
   degree of knowledge of it which the mind has obtained.

   But here a double difficulty presents itself, which must first be
   removed, in order that our feet may afterwards without stumbling run
   along a path that will then appear smooth and to have been for some
   time well trodden. (1.) The one is, "How can it be that the eye of the
   human understanding does not become dim and beclouded when an object of
   such transcendent light is presented to it?" (2.)

   The other is, "How can the understanding, although its eye may not be
   dim and blinded, receive and contain that object in such great measure
   and proportion?" The cause of the first is, that the light exhibits
   itself to the understanding not in the infinity of its own nature, but
   in a form that is qualified and attempered. And to what is it thus
   accommodated? Is it not to the understanding? Undoubtedly, to the
   understanding; but not according to the capacity which it possessed
   before the union: otherwise it could not receive and contain as much as
   would suffice to fill it and make it happy. But it is attempered
   according to the measure of its extension and enlargement, to admit of
   which the understanding is exquisitely formed, if it be enlightened and
   irradiated by the gracious and glorious shining of the light
   accommodated to that expansion. If it be thus enlightened, the eye of
   the understanding will not be overpowered and become dim, and it will
   receive that object in such a vast proportion as will most abundantly
   suffice to make man completely happy. This is a solution for both these
   difficulties. But an extension of the understanding will be followed by
   an enlargement of the will, either from a proper and adequate object
   offered to it, and accommodated to the same rule; or, (which I prefer,)
   from the native agreement of the will and understanding, and the
   analogy implanted in both of them, according to which the understanding
   extends itself to acts of volition, in the very proportion of its
   understanding and knowledge. In this act of the mind and will in seeing
   a present God, in loving him, and therefore in the enjoyment of him,
   the salvation of man and his perfect happiness consist. To which is
   added , conformation of our body itself to this glorious state of soul,
   which, whether it be effected by the immediate action of God on the
   body, or by means of an agency resulting from the action of the soul on
   the body, it is neither necessary for us here to inquire, nor at this
   time to discover. From hence also arises and shines forth illustriously
   the chief and infinite glory of God, far surpassing all other glory,
   that he has displayed in every preceding function which he
   administered. For since that action is truly great and glorious which
   is good, and since goodness alone obtains the title of "greatness,"
   according to that elegant saying, to eu mega then indeed the best
   action of God is the greatest and the most glorious. But that is the
   best action by which he unites himself immediately to the creature and
   affords himself to be seen, loved and enjoyed in such an abundant
   measure as agrees with the creature dilated and expanded to that degree
   which we have mentioned. This is, therefore, the most glorious of God's
   actions. Wherefore the end of Theology is the union , God with man, to
   the salvation of the one and the glory of the other; and to the glory
   which he declares by his act, not that glory which man ascribes to God
   when he is united to him. Yet it cannot be otherwise, than that man
   should be incited to sing forever the high praises of God, when he
   beholds and enjoys such large and overpowering goodness.

   But the observations we have hitherto made on the End of Theology, were
   accommodated to the manner of that which is legal. We must now consider
   the End as it is proposed to Evangelical Theology. The End of this is
   (1.) God and Christ, (2.) the union of man with both of them, and (3.)
   the sight and fruition of both, to the glory of both Christ and God. On
   each of these particulars we have some remarks to make from the
   scriptures, and which most appropriately agree with, and are peculiar
   to, the Evangelical doctrine.

   But before we enter upon these remarks, we must shew that the salvation
   of man, to the glory of Christ himself, consists also in the love, the
   sight, and the fruition of Christ. There is a passage in the fifteenth
   chapter of the first Epistle of the Apostle Paul to the Corinthians,
   which imposes this necessity upon us, because it appears to exclude
   Christ from this consideration. For in that place the apostle says,
   "When Christ shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the
   Father, then the Son also himself shall be subject unto him, that God
   may be all in all." (1 Cor. xv. 24.) From this passage three
   difficulties are raised, which must be removed by an appropriate
   explanation. They are these: (1.) "If Christ shall deliver up the
   kingdom to God, even the Father,' he will no longer reign himself in
   person." (2.) "If he shall be subject to the Father,' he will no more
   preside over his Church:" and (3.) "If God shall be all in all,' then
   our salvation is not placed in the union, sight and fruition of him." I
   will proceed to give a separate answer to each of these objections. The
   kingdom of Christ embraces two objects: The Mediatorial function of the
   regal office, and the Regal glory: The royal function, will be laid
   aside, because there will then be no necessity or use for it, but the
   royal glory will remain because it was obtained by the acts of the
   Mediator, and was conferred on him by the Father according to covenant.
   The same thing is declared by the expression "shall be subject," which
   here signifies nothing more than the laying aside of the super-eminent
   power which Christ had received from the Father, and which he had, as
   the Father's Vicegerent, administered at the pleasure of his own will:
   And yet, when he has laid down this power, he will remain, as we shall
   see, the head and the husband of his Church. That sentence has a
   similar tendency in which it is said, "God shall be ALL IN ALL." For it
   takes away even the intermediate and deputed administration of the
   creatures which God is accustomed to use in the communication of his
   benefits; and it indicates that God will likewise immediately from
   himself communicate his own good, even himself to his creatures.
   Therefore, on the authority of this passage, nothing is taken away from
   Christ which we have been wishful to attribute to him in this discourse
   according to the scriptures.

   This we will now shew by some plain and apposite passages. Christ
   promises an union with himself in these words, "If a man love me, he
   will keep my words; and my Father will love him, and we will come unto
   him, and make our abode with him." (John xiv. 23.) Here is a promise of
   good: therefore the good of the Church is likewise placed in union with
   Christ; and an abode is promised, not admitting of termination by the
   bounds of this life, but which will continue for ever, and shall at
   length, when this short life is ended, be consummated in heaven. In
   reference to this, the Apostle says, "I desire to depart and to be with
   Christ;" and Christ himself says, "I will that they also whom thou hast
   given me, be with me where I am." (John xvii. 24.) John says, that the
   end of his gospel is, "that our fellowship may be with the Father and
   the Son;" (1 John i. 3,) in which fellowship eternal life must
   necessarily consist, since in another place he explains the same end in
   these words, "But these are written, that ye might believe that Jesus
   is the Christ: and that, believing, ye might have life through his
   name." (John xx. 31.) But from the meaning of the same Apostle, it
   appears, that this fellowship has an union antecedent to itself. These
   are his words, "If that which ye have heard from the beginning shall
   remain in you ye also shall continue in the Son, and in the Father." (1
   John ii. 24.) What! Shall the union between Christ and his Church cease
   at a period when he shall place before his glorious sight his spouse
   sanctified to himself by his own blood? Far be the idea from us! For
   the union, which had commenced here on earth, will then at length be
   consummated and perfected.

   If any one entertain doubts concerning the vision of Christ, let him
   listen to Christ in this declaration: "He that loveth me shall be loved
   of my Father; and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him."
   (John xiv. 21.) Will he thus disclose himself in this world only? Let
   us again hear Christ when he intercedes with the Father for the
   faithful: "Father, I will that they also, whom thou hast given me, be
   with me where I am; that they may behold my glory, which thou hast
   given me: for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world."
   (John xvii. 34) Christ, therefore, promises to his followers the sight
   of his glory, as something salutary to them; and his Father is
   intreated to grant this favour. The same truth is confirmed by John
   when he says, "Then we shall see him as he is." (1 John iii. 2.) This
   passage may without any impropriety be understood of Christ, and yet
   not to the exclusion of God the Father. But what do we more distinctly
   desire than that Christ may become, what it is said he will be, "the
   light" that shall enlighten the celestial city, and in whose light "the
   nations shall walk?" (Rev. xxi. 23, 24.)

   Although the fruition of Christ is sufficiently established by the same
   passages as those by which the sight of him is confirmed, yet we will
   ratify it by two or three others. Since eternal felicity is called by
   the name of "the supper of the lamb," and is emphatically described by
   this term, "the marriage of the Lamb," I think it is taught with
   adequate clearness in these expressions, that happiness consists in the
   fruition or enjoyment of the Lamb. But the apostle, in his apocalypse,
   has ascribed both these epithets to Christ, by saying, "Let us be glad
   and rejoice, and give honour to him, for the marriage of the Lamb is
   come, and his wife hath made herself ready :" (Rev. xix. 7,) and a
   little afterwards, he says, "Blessed are they which are called to the
   marriage-supper of the Lamb." (verse 9.) It remains for us to treat on
   the glory of Christ, which is inculcated in these numerous passages of
   Scripture in which it is stated that "he sits with the Father on his
   throne," and is adored and glorified both by angels and by men in
   heaven.

   Having finished the proof of those expressions, the truth of which we
   engaged to demonstrate, we will now proceed to fulfill our promise of
   explanation, and to show that all and each of these benefits descend to
   us in a peculiar and more excellent manner, from Evangelical Theology,
   than they could have done from that which is Legal, if by it we could
   really have been made alive.

   2. And, that we may, in the first place, dispatch the subject of Union,
   let the brief remarks respecting marriage which we have just made, be
   brought again to our remembrance. For that word more appropriately
   honours this union, and adorns it with a double and remarkable
   privilege; one part of which consists of a deeper combination, the
   other of a more glorious title. The Scripture speaks thus of the deeper
   combination; "And the two shall be one flesh. This is a great mystery:
   but I speak concerning Christ and the church!" (Ephes. v. 31, 32.) It
   will therefore be a connubial tie that will unite Christ with the
   church. The espousals of the church on earth are contracted by the
   agency of the brides-men of Christ, who are the prophets, the apostles,
   and their successors, and particularly the Holy Ghost, who is in this
   affair a mediator and arbitrator. The consummation will then follow,
   when Christ will introduce his spouse into his bride-chamber. From such
   an union as this, there arises, not only a communion of blessings, but
   a previous communion of the persons themselves; from which the
   possession of blessings is likewise assigned, by a more glorious title,
   to her who is united in the bonds of marriage. The church comes into a
   participation not only of the blessings of Christ, but also of his
   title. For, being the wife of the King, she enjoys it as a right due to
   her to be called QUEEN; which dignified appellation the scripture does
   not withhold from her. "Upon thy right hand stands the Queen in gold of
   Ophir:" (Psalm xlv. 9.) "There are three-score queens, and four-score
   concubines, and virgins without number. "My dove, my undefiled, is but
   one; she is the only one of her mother, she is the choice one of her
   that bare her. The daughter saw her, and blessed her; yea, the queens
   and the concubines; and they praised her." (Song of Sol. vi. 8, 9.) The
   church could not have been eligible to the high honour of such an
   union, unless Christ has been made her beloved, her brother, sucking
   the breasts of the same mother." (Cant. 8.) But there would have been
   no necessity for this union, "if righteousness and salvation had come
   to us by the law." That was, therefore, a happy necessity, which, out
   of compassion to the emergency of our wretched condition, the divine
   condescension improved to our benefit, and filled with such a plenitude
   of dignity! But the manner of this our union with Christ is no small
   addition to that union which is about to take place between us and God
   the Father. This will be evident to any one who considers what and how
   great is the bond of mutual union between Christ and the Father.

   3. If we turn our attention to sight or vision, we shall meet with two
   remarkable characters which are peculiar to Evangelical Theology.

   (1.) In the first place, the glory of God, as if accumulated and
   concentrated together into one body, will be presented to our view in
   Christ Jesus; which glory would otherwise have been dispersed
   throughout the most spacious courts of a "heaven immense;" much in the
   same manner as the light, which had been created on the first day, and
   equally spread through the whole hemisphere, was on the fourth day
   collected, united and compacted together into one body, and offered to
   the eyes as a most conspicuous and shining object. In reference to
   this, it is said in the Apocalypse, that the heavenly Jerusalem "had no
   need of the sun, neither of the moon; for the glory of God did lighten
   it, and the Lamb will be the future light thereof," (Rev. xxi. 23,) as
   a vehicle by which this most delightful glory may diffuse itself into
   immensity.

   (2.) We shall then not only contemplate, in God himself, the most
   excellent properties of his nature, but shall also perceive that all of
   them have been employed in and devoted to the procuring of this good
   for us, which we now possess in hope, but which we shall in reality
   then possess by means of this union and open vision.

   The excellence, therefore, of this vision far exceeds that which could
   have been by the law; and from this source arises a fruition of greater
   abundance and more delicious sweetness. For, as the light in the sun is
   brighter than that in the stars, so is the sight of the sun, when the
   human eye is capable of bearing it, more grateful and acceptable, and
   the enjoyment of it is far more pleasant. From such a view of the
   Divine attributes, the most delicious sweetness of fruition will seem
   to be doubled. For the first delight will arise from the contemplation
   of properties so excellent; the other from the consideration of that
   immeasurable condescension by which it has pleased God to unfold all
   those his properties, and the whole of those blessings which he
   possesses in the exhaustless and immeasurable treasury of his riches,
   and to give this explanation, that he may procure salvation for man and
   may impart it to his most miserable creature. This will then be seen in
   as strong a light, as if the whole of that which is essentially God
   appeared to exist for the sake of man alone, and for his solo benefit.
   There is also the addition of this peculiarity concerning it: "Jesus
   Christ shall change our vile body, [the body of our humiliation,] that
   it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body: (Phil. iii. 21,) and
   as we have borne the image of the earthy [Adam], we shall also bear the
   image of the heavenly." (1 Cor. xv. 49.) Hence it is, that all things
   are said to be made new in Christ Jesus; (2 Cor. v. 17,) and we are
   described in the scriptures as "looking, according to his promise, for
   new heavens and a new earth, (2 Pet. iii. 13,) and a new name written
   on a white stone, (Rev. ii. 17,) the new name of my God, and the name
   of the city of my God, which is the new Jerusalem, (Rev. iii. 12.) and
   they shall sing a new song to God and his Christ forever." (Rev. v. 9.)

   Who does not now see, how greatly the felicity prepared for us by
   Christ, and offered to us through Evangelical Theology excels that
   which would have come to us by "the righteousness of the law," if
   indeed it had been possible for us to fulfill it? We should in that
   case have been similar to the elect angels; but now we shall be their
   superiors, if I be permitted to make such a declaration, to the praise
   of Christ and our God, in this celebrated Hall, and before an assembly
   among whom we have some of those most blessed spirits themselves as
   spectators. They now enjoy union with God and Christ, and will probably
   be more closely united to both of them at the time of the "restitution
   of all things." But there will be nothing between the two parties
   similar to that Conjugal Bond which unites us, and in which we may be
   permitted to glory.

   They will behold God himself "face to face," and will contemplate the
   most eminent properties of his nature; but they will see some among
   those properties devoted to the purpose of man's salvation, which God
   has not unfolded for their benefit, because that was not necessary; and
   which he would not have unfolded, even if it had been necessary. These
   things they will see, but they will not be moved by envy; it will
   rather be a subject of admiration and wonder to them, that God, the
   Creator of both orders, conferred on man, (who was inferior to them in
   nature,) that dignity which he had of old denied to the spirits that
   partook with themselves of the same nature. They will behold Christ,
   that most brilliant and shining light of the city of the living God, of
   which they also are inhabitants: and, from this very circumstance their
   happiness will be rendered more illustrious through Christ. Christ
   "took not on him the nature of angels, but the seed of Abraham;" (Heb.
   ii, 16,) to whom also, in that assumed nature, they will present
   adoration and honour, at the command of God, when he introduces his
   First begotten into the world to come. Of that future world, and of its
   blessings, they also will be partakers: but "it is not put in
   subjection to them," (Heb. ii. 5,) but to Christ and his Brethren, who
   are partakers of the same nature, and are sanctified by himself. A
   malignant spirit, yet of the same order as the angels, had hurled
   against God the crimes of falsehood and envy. But we see how signally
   God in Christ and in the salvation procured by him, has repelled both
   these accusations from himself. The falsehood intimated an
   unwillingness on the part of God that man should be reconciled to him,
   except by the intervention of the death of his Son. His envy was
   excited, because God had raised man, not only to the angelical
   happiness, (to which even that impure one would have attained had "he
   kept his first estate,) but to a state of blessedness far superior to
   that of angels.

   That I may not be yet more prolix, I leave it as a subject of
   reflection to the devoted piety of your private meditations, most
   accomplished auditors, to estimate the vast and amazing greatness of
   the glory of God which has here manifested itself, and to calculate the
   glory due from us to him for such transcendent goodness.

   In the mean time, let all of us, however great our number, consider
   with a devout and attentive mind, what duty is required of us by this
   doctrine, which having received its manifestation from God and Christ,
   plainly and fully announces to us such a great salvation, and to the
   participation of which we are most graciously invited. It requires to
   be received, understood, believed, and fulfilled, in deed and in
   reality. It is worthy of all acceptation, on account of its Author; and
   necessary to be received on account of its End.

   1. Being delivered by so great an Author, it is worthy to be received
   with a humble and submissive mind; to have much diligence and care
   bestowed on a knowledge and perception of it; and not to be laid aside
   from the hand, the mind, or the heart, until we shall have "obtained
   the End of it--THE SALVATION OF OUR SOULS." Why should this be done?
   Shall the Holy God open his mouth, and our ears remain stopped? Shall
   our Heavenly Master be willing to communicate instruction, and we
   refuse to learn? Shall he desire to inspire our hearts with the
   knowledge of his Divine truth, and we, by closing the entrance to our
   hearts, exclude the most evident and mild breathings of his Spirit?
   Does Christ, who is the Father's Wisdom, announce to us that gospel
   which he has brought from the bosom of the Father, and shall we disdain
   to hide it in the inmost recesses of our heart? And shall we act thus,
   especially when we have received this binding command of the Father,
   which says, "Hear ye him!" (Matt. xvii. 5,) to which he has added a
   threat, that "if we hear him not, our souls shall be destroyed from
   among the people; (Acts iii. 23,) that is, from the commonwealth of
   Israel? Let none of us fall into the commission of such a heinous
   offense! "For if the word spoken by angels was steadfast, and every
   transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of reward;
   how shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation, which at the
   first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them
   that heard him ," (Heb. ii. 2, 3.)

   2. To all the preceding considerations, let the End of this doctrine be
   added, and it will be of the greatest utility in enforcing this the
   work of persuasion on minds that are not prodigal of their own proper
   and Chief Good--an employment in which its potency and excellence are
   most apparent. Let us reflect, for what cause God has brought us out of
   darkness into this marvelous light; has furnished us with a mind,
   understanding, and reason; and has adorned us with his image. Let this
   question be revolved in our minds, "For what purpose or End has God
   restored the fallen to their pristine state of integrity, reconciled
   sinners to himself, and received enemies into favour," and we shall
   plainly discover all this to have been done, that we might be made
   partakers of eternal salvation, and might sing praises to him forever.
   But we shall not be able to aspire after this End, much less to attain
   it, except in the way which is pointed out by that Theological Doctrine
   which has been the topic of our discourse. If we wander from this End,
   our wanderings from it extend, not only beyond the whole earth and sea,
   but beyond heaven itself--that city of which nevertheless it is
   essentially necessary for us to be made free men, and to have our names
   enrolled among the living. This doctrine is "the gate of heaven," and
   the door of paradise; the ladder of Jacob, by which Christ descends to
   us, and we shall in turn ascend to him; and the golden chain, which
   connects heaven with earth. Let us enter into this gate; let us ascend
   this ladder; and let us cling to this chain. Ample and wide is the
   opening of the gate, and it will easily admit believers; the position
   of the ladder is movable, and will not suffer those who ascend it to be
   shaken or moved; the joining which unites one link of the chain with
   another is indissoluble, and will not permit those to fall down who
   cling to it, until we come to "him that liveth forever and ever," and
   are raised to the throne of the Most High; till we be united to the
   living God, and Jesus Christ our Lord, "the Son of the Highest."

   But on you, O chosen youths, this care is a duty peculiarly incumbent;
   for God has destined you to become "workers together with him," in the
   manifestation of the gospel, and instruments to administer to the
   salvation of others. Let the Majesty of the Holy Author of your
   studies, and the necessity of the End, be always placed before your
   eyes. (1.) On attentively viewing the Author, let the words of the
   Prophet Amos recur to your remembrance and rest on your mind: "The lion
   hath roared, who will not fear? The Lord God hath spoken, who can but
   prophesy?" (Amos ii. 8.) But you cannot prophesy, unless you be
   instructed by the Spirit of Prophesy. In our days he addresses no one
   in that manner, except in the Scriptures; he inspires no one, except by
   means of the Scriptures, which are divinely inspired. (2.) In
   contemplating the End, you will discover, that it is not possible to
   confer on any one, in his intercourse with mankind, an office of
   greater dignity and utility, or an office that is more salutary in its
   consequences, than this, by which he may conduct them from error into
   the way of truth, from wickedness to righteousness, from the deepest
   misery to the highest felicity; and by which he may contribute much
   towards their everlasting salvation. But this truth is taught by
   Theology alone; there is nothing except this heavenly science that
   prescribes the true righteousness; and by it alone is this felicity
   disclosed, and our salvation made known and revealed. Let the sacred
   Scriptures therefore be your models:

   "Night and day read them, read them day and night. Colman.

   If you thus peruse them, "they will make you that you shall not be
   barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ; (2
   Pet. i. 8,) but you will become good ministers of Jesus Christ,
   nourished up in the words of faith and of good doctrine; (1 Tim. iv.
   6,) and ready to every good work; (Tit. iii. 1,) workmen who need not
   to be ashamed;" (2 Tim. ii. 15,) sowing the gospel with diligence and
   patience; and returning to your Lord with rejoicing, bringing with you
   an ample harvest, through the blessing of God and the grace of our Lord
   Jesus Christ: to whom be praise and glory from this time, even forever
   more! Amen !
     __________________________________________________________________

ORATION III

  THE CERTAINTY OF SACRED THEOLOGY

   Although the observations which I have already offered in explanation
   of the Object, the Author and the End of sacred Theology, and other
   remarks which might have been made, if they had fallen into the hands
   of a competent interpreter, although all of them contain admirable
   commendations of this Theology, and convince us that it is altogether
   divine, since it is occupied concerning God, is derived from God, and
   leads to God; yet they will not be able to excite within the mind of
   any person a sincere desire of entering upon such a study, unless he be
   at the same time encouraged by the bright rays of an assured hope of
   arriving at a knowledge of the desirable Object, and of obtaining the
   blessed End. For since the perfection of motion is rest, vain and
   useless will that motion be which is not able to attain rest, the limit
   of its perfection. But no prudent person will desire to subject himself
   to vain and useless labour. All our hope, then, of attaining to this
   knowledge is placed in Divine revelation. For the anticipation of this
   very just conception has engaged the minds of men, "that God cannot be
   known except through himself, to whom also there can be no approach but
   through himself." On this account it becomes necessary to make it
   evident to man, that a revelation has been made by God; that the
   revelation which has been given is fortified and defended by such sure
   and approved arguments, as will cause it to be considered and
   acknowledged as divine; and that there is a method, by which a man may
   understand the meanings declared in the word, and may apprehend them by
   a firm and assured faith. To the elucidation of the last proposition,
   this third part of our labour must be devoted. God grant that I may in
   this discourse again follow the guidance of his word as it is revealed
   in the scriptures, and may bring forth and offer to your notice such
   things as may contribute to establish our faith, and to promote the
   glory of God, to the uniting together of all of us in the Lord. I pray
   and beseech you also, my very famous and most accomplished hearers, not
   to disdain to favour me with a benevolent and patient hearing, while I
   deliver this feeble oration in your presence.

   As we are now entering upon a consideration of the Certainty of Sacred
   Theology, it is not necessary that we should contemplate it under the
   aspect of Legal and Evangelical; for in both of them there is the same
   measure of the truth, and therefore, the same measure of knowledge, and
   that is certainty. We will treat on this subject, then, in a general
   manner, without any particular reference or application.

   But that our oration may proceed in an orderly course, it will be
   requisite in the first place briefly to describe Certainty in general;
   and then to treat at greater length on the Certainty Of Theology.

   I. Certainty, then, is a property of the mind or understanding, and a
   mode of knowledge according to which the mind knows an object as it is,
   and is certain that it knows that object as it is. It is distinct from
   Opinion; because it is possible for opinion to know a matter as it is,
   but its knowledge is accompanied by a suspicion of the opposite
   falsity. Two things, therefore, are required, to constitute certainty.
   (1.) The truth of the thing itself, and (2.) such an apprehension of it
   in our minds as we have just described. This very apprehension,
   considered as being formed from the truth of the thing itself, and
   fashioned according to such truth, is also called Truth on account of
   the similitude; even as the thing itself is certain, on account of the
   action of the mind which apprehends it in that manner. Thus do those
   two things, (certainty and truth,) because of their admirable union,
   make a mutual transfer of their names, the one to the other.

   But truth may in reality be viewed in two aspects--one simple, and the
   other compound. (1.) The former, in relation to a thing as being in the
   number of entities; (2.) the latter, in reference to something inherng
   in a thing, being present with it or one of its circumstantials--or in
   reference to a thing as producing something else, or as being

   produced by some other--and if there be any other affections and
   relations of things among themselves. The process of truth in the mind
   is after the same manner. Its action is of two kinds. (1.) On a simple
   being or entity which is called "a simple apprehension;" and (2.) on a
   complex being, which is termed composition." The mode of truth is
   likewise, in reality, two-fold--necessary and contingent; according to
   which, a thing, whether it be simple or complex, is called "necessary"
   or "contingent." The necessity of a simple thing is the necessary
   existence of the thing itself, whether it obtain the place of a subject
   or that of an attribute. The necessity of a complex thing is the
   unavoidable and essential disposition and habitude that subsists
   between the subject and the attribute.

   That necessity which, as we have just stated, is to be considered in
   simple things, exists in nothing except in God and in those things
   which, although they agree with him in their nature, are yet
   distinguished from him by our mode of considering them. All other
   things, whatever may be their qualities, are contingent, from the
   circumstance of their being brought into action by power; neither are
   they contingent only by reason of their beginning, but also of their
   continued duration. Thus the existence of God, is a matter of
   necessity; his life, wisdom, goodness, justice, mercy, will and power,
   likewise have a necessary existence. But the existence and preservation
   of the creatures are not of necessity. Thus also creation,
   preservation, government, and whatever other acts are attributed to God
   in respect of his creatures, are not of necessity. The foundation of
   necessity is the nature of God; the principle of contingency is the
   free will of the Deity. The more durable it has pleased God to create
   anything, the nearer is its approach to necessity, and the farther it
   recedes from contingency; although it never pass beyond the boundaries
   of contingency, and never reach the inaccessible abode of necessity.

   Complex necessity exists not only in God, but also in the things of his
   creation. It exists in God, partly on account of the foundation of his
   nature, and partly on account of the principle of his free-will. But
   its existence in the creatures is only from the free will of God, who
   at once resolved that this should be the relation and habitude between
   two created objects. Thus "God lives, understands, and loves," is a
   necessary truth from his very nature as God. "God is the Creator,"
   "Jesus Christ is the saviour," "An angel is a created spirit endowed
   with intelligence and will," and "A man is a rational creature," are
   all necessary truths from the free will of God.

   From this statement it appears, that degrees may be constituted in the
   necessity of a complex truth; that the highest may be attributed to
   that truth which rests upon the nature of God as its foundation; that
   the rest, which proceed from the will of God, may be excelled by that
   which (by means of a greater affection of his will,) God has willed to
   invest with such right of precedence; and that it may be followed by
   that which God has willed by a less affection of his will. The motion
   of the sun is necessary from the very nature of that luminary; but it
   is more necessary that the children of Israel be preserved and avenged
   on their enemies; the sun is therefore commanded to stand still in the
   midst of the heavens. (Josh. x. 13.) It is necessary that the sun be
   borne along from the east to the west, by the diurnal motion of the
   heavens. But it is more necessary that Hezekiah receive, by a sure
   sign, a confirmation of the prolongation of his life; the sun,
   therefore, when commanded, returns ten degrees backward; (Isa. xxxviii.
   8,) and thus it is proper, that the less necessity should yield to the
   greater, and that from the free will of God, which has imposed a law on
   both of them. As this kind of necessity actually exists in things, the
   mind, by observing the same gradations, apprehends and knows it, if
   such a mode of cognition can truly deserve the name of "knowledge."

   But the causes of this Certainty are three. For it is produced on the
   mind, either by the senses, by reasoning and discourse, or by
   revelation. The first is called the certainty of experience; the
   second, that of knowledge; and the last, that of faith. The first is
   the certainty of particular objects which come within the range and
   under the observation of the senses; the second is that of general
   conclusions deduced from known principles; and the last is that of
   things remote from the cognizance both of the senses and reason.

   II. Let these observations now be applied to our present purpose. The
   Object of our Theology is God, and Christ in reference to his being God
   and Man. God is a true Being, and the only necessary one, on account of
   the necessity of his and he is also a necessary Being, because he will
   endure to all eternity. The things which are attributed to God in our
   Theology: partly belong to his nature, and partly agree with it by his
   own free will. By his nature, life, wisdom, goodness, justice, mercy,
   will and power belong to him, by a natural and absolute necessity. By
   his free will, all his volitions and actions concerning the creatures
   agree with his nature, and that immutably; because he willed at the
   same time, that they should not be retracted or repealed. All those
   things which are attributed to Christ, belong to him by the free will
   of God, but on this condition, that "Christ be the same yesterday, and
   to-day, and forever," (Heb. xiii. 8,) entirely exempt from any future
   change, whether it be that of a subject or its attributes, or of the
   affection which exists between the two. All other things, which are
   found in the whole superior and inferior nature of things, (whether
   they be considered simply in themselves, or as they are mutually
   affected among themselves,) do not extend to any degree of this
   necessity. The truth and necessity of our Theology, therefore, far
   exceed the necessity of all other sciences, in as much as both these
   [the truth and necessity,] are situated in the things themselves. The
   certainty of the mind, while it is engaged in the act of apprehending
   and knowing things, cannot exceed the Truth and Necessity of the
   thing's themselves; on the contrary, it very often may not reach them,
   [the truth and necessity,] through some defect in its capacity. For the
   eyes of our mind are in the same condition with respect to the pure
   truth of things, as are the eyes of owls with respect to the light of
   the sun. On this account, therefore, it is of necessity, that the
   object of no science can be known with greater certainty than that of
   Theology; but it follows rather, that a knowledge of this object may be
   obtained with the greatest degree of certainty, if it be presented in a
   qualified and proper manner to the inspection of the understanding
   according to its capacity. For this object is not of such a nature and
   condition as to be presented to the external senses; nor can its
   attributes, properties, affections, actions and passions be known by
   means of the observation and experience of the external senses. It is
   too sublime for them; and the attributes, properties, affections,
   actions and passions, which agree with it, are so high that the mind,
   even when assisted by reason and discourse, can neither know it,
   investigate its attributes, nor demonstrate that they agree with the
   subject, whatever the principles may be which it has applied, and to
   whatever causes it may have had recourse, whether they be such as arise
   from the object itself, from its attributes, or from the agreement
   which subsists between them. The Object is known to itself alone; and
   the whole truth and necessity are properly and immediately known to Him
   to whom they belong; to God in the first place and in an adequate
   degree; to Christ, in the second place, through the communication of
   God. To itself, in an adequate manner, in reference to the knowledge
   which it has of itself; in an inferior degree to God, in reference to
   his knowledge of him, [Christ.] Revelation is therefore necessary by
   which God may exhibit himself and his Christ as an object of sight and
   knowledge to our understanding; and this exhibition to be made in such
   a manner as to unfold at once all their attributes, properties,
   affections, actions and passions, as far as it is permitted for them to
   be known, concerning God and his Christ, to our salvation and to their
   glory; and that God may thus disclose all and every portion of those
   theorems in which both the subjects themselves and all their attending
   attributes are comprehended. Revelation is necessary, if it be true
   that God and his Christ ought to be known, and both of them be worthy
   to receive Divine honours and worship. But both of them ought to be
   known and worshipped; the revelation, therefore, of both of them is
   necessary; and because it is thus necessary, it has been made by God.
   For if nature, as a partaker and communicator of a good that is only
   partial, is not deficient in the things that are necessary; how much
   less ought we even to suspect such a deficiency in God, the Author and
   Artificer of nature, who is also the Chief Good?

   But to inspect this subject a little more deeply and particularly, will
   amply repay our trouble; for it is similar to the foundation on which
   must rest the weight of the structure--the other doctrines which
   follow. For unless it should appear certain and evident, that a
   revelation has been made, it will be in vain to inquire and dispute
   about the word in which that revelation has been made and is contained.
   In the first place, then, the very nature of God most clearly evinces
   that a revelation has been made of himself and Christ. His nature is
   good, beneficent, and communicative of his blessedness, whether it be
   that which proceeds from it by creation, or that which is God himself.
   But there is no communication made of Divine good, unless God be made
   known to the understanding, and be desired by the affections and the
   will. But he cannot become an object of knowledge except by revelation.
   A revelation, therefore, is made, as a necessary instrument of
   communication.

   2. The necessity of this revelation may in various ways be inferred and
   taught from the nature and condition of man. First. By nature, man
   possesses a mind and understanding. But it is just that the mind and
   understanding should be turned towards their Creator; this, however,
   cannot be done without a knowledge of the Creator, and such knowledge
   cannot be obtained except by revelation; a revelation has, therefore,
   been made. Secondly. God himself formed the nature of man capable of
   Divine Good. But in vain would it have had such a capacity, if it might
   not at some time partake of this Divine Good; but of this the nature of
   man cannot be made a partaker except by the knowledge of it; the
   knowledge of this Divine Good has therefore been manifested. Thirdly.
   It is not possible, that the desire which God has implanted within man
   should be vain and fruitless. That desire is for the enjoyment of an
   Infinite Good, which is God; but that Infinite Good cannot be enjoyed,
   except it be known; a revelation, therefore, has been made, by which it
   may be known.

   3. Let that relation be brought forward which subsists between God and
   man, and the revelation that has been made will immediately become
   manifest. God, the Creator of man, has deserved it as his due, to
   receive worship and honour from the workmanship of his hands, on
   account of the benefit which he conferred by the act of creation.
   Religion and piety are due to God, from man his creature; and this
   obligation is coeval with the very birth of man, as the bond which
   contains this requisition was given on the very day in which he was
   created. But religion could not be a human invention. For it is the
   will of God to receive worship according to the rule and appointment of
   his own will. A revelation was therefore made, which exacts from man
   the religion due to God, and prescribes that worship which is in
   accordance with his pleasure and his honour.

   4. If we turn our attention towards Christ, it is amazing how great the
   necessity of a manifestation appears, and how many arguments
   immediately present themselves in behalf of a revelation being
   communicated. Wisdom wishes to be acknowledged as the deviser of the
   wonderful attempering and qualifying of justice and mercy. Goodness and
   gracious mercy, as the administrators of such an immense benefit sought
   to be worshipped and honoured. And power, as the hand-maid of such
   stupendous wisdom and goodness, and as the executrix of the decree made
   by both of them, deserved to receive adoration. But the different acts
   of service which were due to each of them, could not be rendered to
   them without revelation. The wisdom, mercy and power of God, have,
   therefore, been revealed and displayed most copiously in Christ Jesus.
   He performed a multitude of most wonderful works, by which we might
   obtain the salvation that we had lost; he endured most horrid torments
   and inexpressible distress, which, when pleaded in our favour, served
   to obtain this salvation for us; and by the gift of the Father he was
   possessed of an abundance of graces, and, at the Divine command, he
   became the distributor of them. Having, therefore, sustained all these
   offices for us, it is his pleasure to receive those acknowledgments,
   and those acts of Divine honour and worship, which are due to him on
   account of his extraordinary merits. But in vain will he expect the
   performance of these acts from man, unless he be himself revealed. A
   revelation of Christ has, therefore, been made. Consult actual
   experience, and that will supply you with numberless instances of this
   manifestation. The devil himself, who is the rival of Christ, has
   imitated these instances of gracious manifestation, has held converse
   with men under the name and semblance of the true God, has demanded
   acts of devotion from them, and prescribed to them a mode of religious
   worship. We have, therefore, the truth and the necessity of our
   Theology agreeing together in the highest degree; we have an adequate
   notion of it in the mind of God and Christ, according to the word which
   is called emfutov "engrafted." (James i. 21.) We have a revelation of
   this Theology made to men by the word preached; which revelation agrees
   both with the things themselves and with the notion which we have
   mentioned, but in a way that is attempered and suited to the human
   capacity. And as all these are preliminaries to the certainty which we
   entertain concerning this Theology, it was necessary to notice them in
   these introductory remarks.

   Let us now consider this Certainty itself. But since a revelation has
   been made in the word which has been published, and since the whole of
   it is contained in that word, (so that This Word is itself our
   Theology,) we can determine nothing concerning the certainty of
   Theology in any other way than by offering some explanation concerning
   our certain apprehension of that word. We will assume it as a fact
   which is allowed and confirmed, that this word is to be found in no
   other place than in the sacred books of the Old and New Testament; and
   we shall on this account confine this certain apprehension of our mind
   to that word. But in fulfilling this design, three things demand our
   attentive consideration: First. The Certainty, and the kind of
   certainty which God requires from us, and by which it is his pleasure
   that this word should be received and apprehended by us as the Chief
   Certainty. Secondly. The reasons and arguments by which the truth of
   that word, which is its divinity, may be proved. Thirdly. How a
   persuasion of that divinity may be wrought in our minds, and this
   Certainty may be impressed on our hearts.

   I. The Certainty "with which God wishes this word to be received, is
   that of faith; and it therefore depends on the veracity of him who
   utters it." By this Certainty "it is received," not only as true, but
   as divine; and it is not of that involved and mixed kind "of faith" by
   which any one, without understanding the meanings expressed by the word
   as by a sign, believes that those books which are contained in the
   Bible, are divine: for not only is a doubtful opinion opposed to faith,
   but an obscure and perplexed conception is equally inimical. Neither is
   it that species "of historical faith" which believes the word to be
   divine that it comprehends only by a theoretical understanding. But God
   demands that faith to be given to his word, by which the meanings
   expressed in this word may be understood, as far as it is necessary for
   the salvation of men and the glory of God; and may be so assuredly
   known to be divine, that they may be believed to embrace not only the
   Chief Truth, but also the Chief Good of man. This faith not only
   believes that God and Christ exist, it not only gives credence to them
   when they make declarations of any kind, but it believes in God and
   Christ when they affirm such things concerning themselves, as, being
   apprehended by faith, create a belief in God as our Father, and in
   Christ as our saviour. This we consider to be the office of an
   understanding that is not merely theoretical, but of one that is
   practical. For this cause not only is asfaleia (certainty,) attributed
   in the Scriptures to true and living faith, but to it are likewise
   ascribed both wlhroforia (a full assurance, Heb. vi. 2,) and wewoiqhsiv
   (trust or confidence,2 Cor. iii. 4,) and it is God who requires and
   demands such a species of certainty and of faith.

   II. We may now be permitted to proceed by degrees from this point, to a
   consideration of those arguments which prove to us the divinity of the
   word; and to the manner in which the required certainty and faith are
   produced in our minds. To constitute natural vision we know that,
   (beside an object capable of being seen,) not only is an external light
   necessary to shine upon it and to render it visible, but an internal
   strength of eye is also required, which may receive within itself the
   form and appearance of the object which has been illuminated by the
   external light, and may thus be enabled actually to behold it. The same
   accompaniments are necessary to constitute spiritual vision; for,
   beside this external light of arguments and reasoning, an internal
   light of the mind and soul is necessary to perfect this vision of
   faith. But infinite is the number of arguments on which this world
   builds and establishes its divinity. We will select and briefly notice
   a few of those which are more usual, lest by too great a prolixity we
   become too troublesome and disagreeable to our auditory.
     __________________________________________________________________

  1. THE DIVINITY OF SCRIPTURE

   Let scripture itself come forward, and perform the chief part in
   asserting its own Divinity. Let us inspect its substance and its
   matter. It is all concerning God and his Christ, and is occupied in
   declaring the nature of both of them, in further explaining the love,
   the benevolence, and the benefits which have been conferred by both of
   them on the human race, or which have yet to be conferred; and
   prescribing, in return, the duties of men towards their Divine
   Benefactors. The scripture, therefore, is divine in its object.

   (2.) But how is it occupied in treating on these subjects? It explains
   the nature of God in such a way as to attribute nothing extraneous to
   it, and nothing that does not perfectly agree with it. It describes the
   person of Christ in such a manner, that the human mind, on beholding
   the description, ought to acknowledge, that "such a person could not
   have been invented or devised by any created intellect," and that it is
   described with such aptitude, suitableness and sublimnity, as far to
   exceed the largest capacity of a created understanding. In the same
   manner the scripture is employed in relating the love of God and Christ
   towards us, and in giving an account of the benefits which we receive.
   Thus the Apostle Paul, when he wrote to the Ephesians on these
   subjects, says, that from his former writings, the extent of "his
   knowledge of the mystery of Christ" might be manifest to them; (Ephes.
   iii. 4.) that is, it was divine, and derived solely from the revelation
   of God. Let us contemplate the law in which is comprehended the duty of
   men towards God. What shall we find, in all the laws of every nation,
   that is at all similar to this, or (omitting all mention of
   "equality,") that may be placed in comparison with those ten short
   sentences? Yet even those commandments, most brief and comprehensive as
   they are, have been still further reduced to two chief heads--the love
   of God, and the love of our neighbour. This law appears in reality to
   have been sketched and written by the right hand of God. That this was
   actually the case, Moses shews in these words, What nation is there so
   great, that hath statutes and judgments so righteous as all this law,
   which I set before you this day?" (Deut. iv. 8.) Moses likewise says,
   that so great and manifest is the divinity which is inherent in this
   law, that it compelled the heathen nations, after they had heard it, to
   declare in ecstatic admiration of it. "Surely this great nation is a
   wise and understanding people?" (Deut. iv. 6.) The scripture,
   therefore, is completely divine, from the manner in which it treats on
   those matters which are its subjects.

   (3.) If we consider the End, it will as clearly point out to us the
   divinity of this doctrine. That End is entirely divine, being nothing
   less than the glory of God and man's eternal salvation. What can be
   more equitable than that all things should be referred to him from whom
   they have derived their origin? What can be more consonant to the
   wisdom, goodness, and power of God, than that he should restore, to his
   original integrity, man who had been created by him, but who had by his
   own fault destroyed himself; and that he should make him a partaker of
   his own Divine blessedness? If by means of any word God had wished to
   manifest himself to man, what end of manifestation ought he to have
   proposed that would have been more honourable to himself and more
   salutary to man? That the word, therefore, was divinely revealed, could
   not be discerned by any mark which was better or more legible, than
   that of its showing to man the way of salvation, taking him as by the
   hand and leading him into that way, and not ceasing to accompany him
   until it introduced him to the full enjoyment of salvation: In such a
   consummation as this, the glory of God most abundantly shines forth and
   displays itself. He who may wish to contemplate what we are declaring
   concerning this End, in a small but noble part of this word, should
   place "the Lord's Prayer" before the eyes of his mind; he should look
   most intently upon it; and, as far as that is possible for human eyes,
   he should thoroughly investigate all its parts and beauties. After he
   has done this, unless he confess, that in it this double end is
   proposed in a manner that is at once so nervous, brief, and accurate,
   as to be above the strength and capacity of every created intelligence,
   and unless he acknowledge, that this form of prayer is purely divine,
   he must of necessity have a mind surrounded and enclosed by more than
   Egyptian darkness.
     __________________________________________________________________

  2. THE AGREEMENT OF THIS DOCTRINE IN ITS PARTS

   Let us compare the parts of this doctrine together, and we shall
   discover in all of them an agreement and harmony, even in points the
   most minute, that it is so great and evident as to cause us to believe
   that it could not be manifested by men, but ought to have implicit
   credence placed in it as having certainly proceeded from God.

   Let the Predictions alone, that have been promulgated concerning Christ
   in different ages, be compared together. For the consolation of the
   first parents of our race, God said to the serpent, "The seed of the
   woman shall bruise thy head." (Gen. iii. 15.) The same promise was
   repeated by God, and was specially made to Abraham: "In thy seed shall
   all the nations be blessed." (Gen. xxii. 18.) The patriarch Jacob, when
   at the point of death, foretold that this seed should come forth from
   the lineage and family of Judah, in these words: "The scepter shall not
   depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh
   come; and unto him shall the gathering of the people be." (Gen. xlix.
   10.) Let the alien prophet also be brought forward, and to these
   predictions he will add that oracular declaration which he pronounced
   by the inspiration and at the command of the God of Israel, in these
   words: Balaam said, "There shall come a star out of Jacob, and a
   scepter shall rise out of Israel, and shall smite the corners of Moab,
   and destroy all the children of Sheth." (Num. xxiv. 17.) This blessed
   seed was afterwards promised to David, by Nathan, in these words: "I
   will set up thy seed after thee, which shall proceed out of thy bowels,
   and I will establish his kingdom." (2 Sam. vii. 12.) On this account
   Isaiah says, "There shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse,
   and a branch shall grow out of his roots." (xi, 1.) And, by way of
   intimating that a virgin would be his mother, the same prophet says,
   "Behold a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his
   name Immanuel!" (Isa. vii. 14.) It would be tedious to repeat every
   declaration that occurs in the psalms and in the other Prophets, and
   that agrees most appropriately with this subject. When these prophecies
   are compared with those occurrences that have been described in the New
   Testament concerning their fulfillment, it will be evident from the
   complete harmony of the whole, that they were all spoken and written by
   the impulse of one Divine Spirit. If some things in those sacred books
   seem to be contradictions, they are easily reconciled by means of a
   right interpretation. I add, that not only do all the parts of this
   doctrine agree among themselves, but they also harmonize with that
   Universal Truth which has been spread through the whole of Philosophy;
   so that nothing can be discovered in Philosophy, which does not
   correspond with this doctrine. If any thing appear not to possess such
   an exact correspondence, it may be clearly confuted by means of true
   Philosophy and right reason.

   Let the Style and Character of the scriptures be produced, and, in that
   instant, a most brilliant and refulgent mirror of the majesty which is
   luminously reflected in it, will display itself to our view in a manner
   the most divine. It relates things that are placed at a great distance
   beyond the range of the human imagination--things which far surpass the
   capacities of men. And it simply relates these things without employing
   any mode of argumentation, or the usual apparatus of persuasion: yet
   its obvious wish is to be understood and believed. But what confidence
   or reason has it for expecting to obtain the realization of this its
   desire? It possesses none at all, except that it depends purely upon
   its own unmixed authority, which is divine. It publishes its commands
   and its interdicts, its enactments and its prohibitions to all persons
   alike; to kings and subjects, to nobles and plebians, to the learned
   and the ignorant, to those that "require a sign" and those that "seek
   after wisdom," to the old and the young; over all these, the rule which
   it bears, and the power which it exercises, are equal. It places its
   sole reliance, therefore, on its own potency, which is able in a manner
   the most efficacious to restrain and compel all those who are
   refractory, and to reward those who are obedient.

   Let the Rewards and Punishments be examined, by which the precepts are
   sanctioned, and there are seen both a promise of life eternal and a
   denunciation of eternal punishments. He who makes such a commencement
   as this, may calculate upon his becoming an object of ridicule, except
   he possess an inward consciousness both of his own right and power; and
   except he know, that, to subdue the wills of mortals, is a matter
   equally easy of accomplishment with him, as to execute his menaces and
   to fulfill his premises. To the scriptures themselves let him have
   recourse who may be desirous to prove with the greatest certainty its
   majesty, from the kind of diction which it adopts: Let him read the
   charming swan-like Song of Moses described in the concluding chapters
   of the Book of Deuteronomy: Let him with his mental eyes diligently
   survey the beginning of Isaiah's prophecy: Let him in a devout spirit
   consider the hundred and fourth Psalm. Then, with these, let him
   compare whatever choice specimens of poetry and eloquence the Greeks
   and the Romans can produce in the most eminent manner from their
   archives; and he will be convinced by the most demonstrative evidence,
   that the latter are productions of the human spirit, and that the
   former could proceed from none other than the Divine Spirit. Let a man
   of the greatest genius, and, in erudition, experience, and eloquence,
   the most accomplished of his race--let such a well instructed mortal
   enter the lists and attempt to finish a composition at all similar to
   these writings, and he will find himself at a loss and utterly
   disconcerted, and his attempt will terminate in discomfiture. That man
   will then confess, that what St. Paul declared concerning his own
   manner of speech, and that of his fellow-labourers, may be truly
   applied to the whole scripture: "Which things also we speak, not in the
   words which man's wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost teacheth;
   comparing spiritual things with spiritual." (1 Cor. ii. 13.)
     __________________________________________________________________

  3. THE PROPHECIES

   Let us next inspect the prophecies scattered through the whole body of
   the doctrine; some of which belong to the substance of the doctrine,
   and others contribute towards procuring authority to the doctrine and
   to its instruments. It should be particularly observed, with what
   eloquence and distinctness they foretell the greatest and most
   important matters, which are far removed from the scrutinizing research
   of every human and angelical mind, and which could not possibly be
   performed except by power Divine: Let it be noticed at the same time
   with what precision the predictions are answered by the periods that
   intervene between them, and by all their concomitant circumstances; and
   the whole world will be compelled to confess, that such things could
   not have been foreseen and foretold, except by an omniscient Deity. I
   need not here adduce examples; for they are obvious to any one that
   opens the Divine volume. I will produce one or two passages, only, in
   which this precise agreement of the prediction and its fulfillment is
   described. When speaking of the children of Israel under the Egyptian
   bondage, and their deliverance from it according to the prediction
   which God had communicated to Abraham in a dream, Moses says, "And it
   came to pass at the end of the four hundred and thirty years, even the
   self-same day it came to pass, that all the hosts of the Lord went out
   from the land of Egypt:" (Exod. xii. 41.) Ezra speaks thus concerning
   the liberation from the Babylonish captivity, which event, Jeremiah
   foretold, should occur within seventy years: "Now in the first year of
   Cyrus, king of Persia, that the word of the Lord by the mouth of
   Jeremiah might be fulfilled, the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus,
   king of Persia," &c. (Ezra i. 1.) But God himself declares by Isaiah,
   that the divinity of the scripture may be proved, and ought to be
   concluded, from this kind of prophecies. These are his words: "Shew the
   things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are Gods."
   (Isa. xli. 23.)
     __________________________________________________________________

  4. MIRACLES

   An illustrious evidence of the same divinity is afforded in the
   miracles, which God has performed by the stewards of his word, his
   prophets and apostles, and by Christ himself, for the confirmation of
   his doctrine and for the establishment of their authority. For these
   miracles are of such a description as infinitely to exceed the united
   powers of all the creatures and all the powers of nature itself, when
   their energies are combined. But the God of truth, burning with zeal
   for his own glory, could never have afforded such strong testimonies as
   these to false prophets and their false doctrine: nor could he have
   borne such witness to any doctrine even when it was true, provided it
   was not his, that is, provided it was not divine. Christ, therefore,
   said, "If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not; but if I do,
   though you believe not me, believe the works." (John x. 37, 38.) It was
   the same cause also, which induced the widow of Sarepta to say, on
   receiving from the hands of Elijah her son, who, after his death, had
   been raised to life by the prophet: "Now by this I know that thou art a
   man of God, and that the word of the Lord in thy mouth is truth." (1
   Kings xvii. 24.) That expression of Nicodemus has the same bearing:
   "Rabbi, we know that thou art a teacher come from God; for no man can
   do these miracles that thou doest, except God be with him." (John iii.
   2.) And it was for a similar reason that the apostle said, "The signs
   of an apostle were wrought among you in all patience, in signs, and
   wonders, and mighty deeds." (2 Cor. xii. 12.) There are indeed miracles
   on record that were wrought among the gentiles, and under the auspices
   of the gods whom they invoked: It is also predicted, concerning False
   Prophets, and Antichrist himself, that they will exhibit many signs and
   wonders: (Rev. xix. 20.) But neither in number, nor in magnitude, are
   they equal to those which the true God has wrought before all Israel,
   and in the view of the whole world. Neither were those feats of their
   real miracles, but only astonishing operations performed by the agency
   and power of Satan and his instruments, by means of natural causes,
   which are concealed from the human understanding, and escape the
   cognizance of men. But to deny the existence of those great and
   admirable miracles which are related to have really happened, when they
   have also the testimony of both Jews and gentiles, who were the enemies
   of the true doctrine--is an evident token of bare-faced impudence and
   execrable stupidity.
     __________________________________________________________________

  5. THE ANTIQUITY OF THE DOCTRINE

   Let the antiquity, the propagation, the preservation, and the truly
   admirable defense of this doctrine be added--and they will afford a
   bright and perspicuous testimony of its divinity. If that which is of
   the highest antiquity possesses the greatest portion of truth," as
   Tertullian most wisely and justly observes, then this doctrine is one
   of the greatest truth, because it can trace its origin to the highest
   antiquity. It is likewise Divine, because it was manifested at a time
   when it could not have been devised by any other mind; for it had its
   commencement at the very period when man was brought into existence. An
   apostate angel would not then have proposed any of his doctrines to
   man, unless God had previously revealed himself to the intelligent
   creature whom he had recently formed: That is, God hindered the fallen
   angel, and there was then no cause in existence by which he might be
   impelled to engage in such an enterprise. For God would not suffer man,
   who had been created after his own image, to be tempted by his enemy by
   means of false doctrine, until, after being abundantly instructed in
   that which was true, he was enabled to know that which was false and to
   reject it. Neither could any odious feeling of envy against man have
   tormented Satan, except God had considered him worthy of the
   communication of his word, and had deigned, through that communication,
   to make him a partaker of eternal. felicity, from which Satan had at
   that period unhappily fallen.

   The Propagation, Preservation, and Defense of this doctrine, most
   admirable when separately considered, will all be found divine, if, in
   the first place, we attentively fix our eyes upon those men among whom
   it is propagated; then on the foes and adversaries of this doctrine;
   and, lastly, on the manner in which its propagation, preservation and
   defense have hitherto been and still are conducted. (1.) If we consider
   those men among whom this sacred doctrine flourishes, we shall discover
   that their nature, on account of its corruption, rejects this doctrine
   for a two-fold reason; (i.) The first is, because in one of its parts
   it is so entirely contrary to human and worldly wisdom, as to subject
   itself to the accusation of Folly from men of corrupt minds. (ii.) The
   second reason is, because in another of its parts it is decidedly
   hostile and inimical to worldly lusts and carnal desires. It is,
   therefore, rejected by the human understanding and refused by the will,
   which are the two chief faculties in man; for it is according to their
   orders and commands that the other faculties are either put in motion
   or remain at rest. Yet, notwithstanding all this natural repugnance, it
   has been received and believed. The human mind, therefore, has been
   conquered, and the subdued will has been gained, by Him who is the
   author of both. (2.)

   This doctrine has some most powerful and bitter enemies: Satan, the
   prince of this world, with all his angels, and the world his ally:
   These are foes with whom there can be no reconciliation. If the
   subtlety, the power, the malice, the audacity, the impudence, the
   perseverance, and the diligence of these enemies, be placed in
   opposition to the simplicity, the inexperience, the weakness, the fear,
   the inconstancy, and the slothfulness of the greater part of those who
   give their assent to this heavenly doctrine; then will the greatest
   wonder be excited, how this doctrine, when attacked by so many enemies,
   and defended by such sorry champions, can stand and remain safe and
   unmoved. If this wonder and admiration be succeeded by a supernatural
   and divine investigation of its cause, then will God himself be
   discovered as the propagator, preserver, and defender of this doctrine.
   (3.) The manner also in which its propagation, preservation and defense
   are conducted, indicates divinity by many irrefragible tokens. This
   doctrine is carried into effect, without bow or sword--without horses
   chariots, or horsemen; yet it proceeds prosperously along, stands in an
   erect posture, and remains unconquered, in the name of the Lord of
   Hosts: While its adversaries, though supported by such apparently able
   auxiliaries and relying on such powerful aid, are overthrown, fall down
   together, and perish. It is accomplished, not by holding out alluring
   promises of riches, glory, and earthly pleasures, but by a previous
   statement of the dreaded cross, and by the prescription of such
   patience and forbearance as far exceed all human strength and ability.
   "He is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name before the gentiles,
   and kings, and the children of Israel; for I will shew him How Great
   Things he must suffer for my name's sake." (Acts ix. 15, 16.) "Behold,
   I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves." (Matt. x. 16)

   Its completion is not effected by the counsels of men, but in
   opposition to all human counsels--whether they be those of the
   professors of this doctrine, or those of its adversaries. For it often
   happens, that the counsels and machinations which have been devised for
   the destruction of this doctrine, contribute greatly towards its
   propagation, while the princes of darkness fret and vex themselves in
   vain, and are astonished and confounded, at an issue so contrary to the
   expectations which they had formed from their most crafty and subtle
   counsels.

   St. Luke says, "Saul made havoc of the church, entering into every
   house, and, haling men and women, committed them to prison. Therefore
   they that were scattered abroad, went every where preaching the word."
   (Acts vii. 3, 4.) And by this means Samaria received the word of God.
   In reference to this subject St. Paul also says, "But I would ye should
   understand, brethren, that the things which happened unto me have
   fallen out rather unto the furtherance of the gospel; so that my bonds
   are manifest in all the palace, and in all other places." (Phil. i. 12,
   13.) For the same cause that common observation has acquired all its
   just celebrity: "The blood of the martyrs is the seed of the church."
   What shall we say to these things? "The stone which the builders
   refused, is become the head stone of the corner: This is the Lord's
   doing; it is marvelous in our eyes." (Psalm cxviii. 22, 23.)

   Subjoin to these the tremendous judgments of God on the persecutors of
   this doctrine, and the miserable death of the tyrants. One of these, at
   the very moment when he was breathing out his polluted and unhappy
   spirit, was inwardly constrained publicly to proclaim, though in a
   frantic and outrageous tone, the divinity of this doctrine in these
   remarkable words: "Thou Hast Conquered, O Galilean!"

   Who is there, now, that, with eyes freed from all prejudice, will look
   upon such clear proofs of the divinity of Scripture, and that will not
   instantly confess: the Apostle Paul had the best reasons for
   exclaiming, "If our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost; in
   whom the God of this world hath blinded the minds of them which believe
   not; lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image
   of God, should shine unto them." (2 Cor. iv. 3, 4) As if he had said,
   "This is not human darkness; neither is it drawn as a thick veil over
   the mind by man himself; but it is diabolical darkness, and spread by
   the devil, the prince of darkness, upon the mind of man, over whom, by
   the just judgment of God, he exercises at his pleasure the most
   absolute tyranny. If this were not the case, it would be impossible for
   this darkness to remain; but, how great soever its density might be, it
   would be dispersed by this light which shines with such overpowering
   brilliancy."
     __________________________________________________________________

  6. THE SANCTITY OF THOSE BY WHOM IT HAS BEEN ADMINISTERED

   The sanctity of those by whom the word was first announced to men and
   by whom it was committed to writing, conduces to the same purpose--to
   prove its Divinity. For since it appears that those who were entrusted
   with the discharge of this duty, had divested themselves of the wisdom
   of the world, and of the feelings and affections of the flesh, entirely
   putting off the old man--and that they were completely eaten up and
   consumed by their zeal for the glory of God and the salvation of
   men--it is manifest that such great sanctity as this had been inspired
   and infused into them, by Him alone who is the Holiest of the holy.

   Let Moses be the first that is introduced: He was treated in a very
   injurious manner by a most ungrateful people, and was frequently marked
   out for destruction; yet was he prepared to purchase their salvation by
   his own banishment. He said, when pleading with God, "Yet now, if thou
   wilt, forgive their sin; and if not, blot me, I pray thee, out of thy
   book which thou hast written." (Exod. xxxii. 32.) Behold his zeal for
   the salvation of the people entrusted to his charge--a zeal for the
   glory of God! Would you see another reason for this wish to be devoted
   to destruction? Read what he had previously said: "Wherefore should the
   Egyptians speak and say? For mischief did the Lord bring them out to
   slay them in the mountains," (Exod. xxxii. 12,) "because he was not
   able to bring them out unto the land which he swear unto their
   Fathers." (Num. xiv. 16.) We observe the same zeal in Paul, when he
   wishes that himself "were accursed from Christ for his brethren the
   Jews, his kinsmen according to the flesh," (Rom. 9) from whom he had
   suffered many and great indignities.

   David was not ashamed publicly to confess his heavy and enormous
   crimes, and to commit them to writing as an eternal memorial to
   posterity. Samuel did not shrink from marking in the records of
   perpetuity the detestable conduct of his sons; and Moses did not
   hesitate to bear a public testimony against the iniquity and the
   madness of his ancestors. If even the least desire of a little glory
   had possessed their minds, they might certainly have been able to
   indulge in taciturnity, and to conceal in silence these circumstances
   of disgrace. Those of them who were engaged in describing the deeds and
   achievements of other people, were unacquainted with the art of
   offering adulation to great men and nobles, and of wrongfully
   attributing to their enemies any unworthy deed or motive. With a regard
   to truth alone, in promoting the glory of God, they placed all persons
   on an equality; and made no other distinction between them than that
   which God himself has commanded to be made between piety and
   wickedness. On receiving from the hand of God their appointment to this
   office, they at once and altogether bade farewell to all the world, and
   to all the desires which are in it. "Each of them said unto his father
   and to his mother, I have not seen him; neither did he acknowledge his
   brethren; for they observed the word of God, and kept his covenant."
   (Deut. xxxiii. 9.)
     __________________________________________________________________

  7. THE CONSTANCY OF ITS PROFESSORS AND MARTYRS

   But what shall we say respecting the constancy of the professors and
   martyrs, which they displayed in the torments that they endured for the
   truth of this doctrine? Indeed, if we subject this constancy to the
   view of the most inflexible enemies of the doctrine, we shall extort
   from unwilling judges a confession of its Divinity. But, that the
   strength of this argument may be placed in a clearer light, the mind
   must be directed to four particulars: the multitude of the martyrs, and
   their condition; the torments which their enemies inflicted on them,
   and the patience which they evinced in enduring them.

   (1.) If we direct our inquiries to the multitude of them, it is
   innumerable, far exceeding thousands of thousands; on this account it
   is out of the power of any one to say, that, because it was the choice
   of but a few persons, it ought to be imputed to frenzy or to weariness
   of a life that was full of trouble.

   (2.) If we inquire into their condition, we shall find nobles and
   peasants, those in authority and their subjects, the learned and the
   unlearned, the rich and the poor, the old and the young; persons of
   both sexes, men and women, the married and the unmarried, men of a
   hardy constitution and inured to dangers, and girls of tender habits
   who had been delicately educated, and whose feet had scarcely ever
   before stumbled against the smallest pebble that arose above the
   surface of their smooth and level path. Many of the early martyrs were
   honourable persons of this description, that no one might think them to
   be inflamed by a desire of glory, or endeavouring to gain applause by
   the perseverance and magnanimity that they had evinced in the
   maintenance of the sentiments which they had embraced.

   (3.) Some of the torments inflicted on such a multitude of persons and
   of such various circumstances in life, were of a common sort, and
   others unusual, some of them quick in their operation and others of
   them slow. Part of the unoffending victims were nailed to crosses and
   part of them were decapitated; some were drowned in rivers, whilst
   others were roasted before a slow fire. Several were ground to powder
   by the teeth of wild beasts, or were torn in pieces by their fangs;
   many were sawn asunder, while others were stoned; and not a few of them
   were subjected to punishments which cannot be expressed, but which are
   accounted most disgraceful and infamous, on account of their extreme
   turpitude and indelicacy. No species of savage cruelty was omitted
   which either the ingenuity of human malignity could invent, which rage
   the most conspicuous and furious could excite, or which even the
   infernal labouratory of the court of hell could supply.

   (4.) And yet, that we may come at once to the patience of these holy
   confessors, they bore all these tortures with constancy and equanimity;
   nay, they endured them with such a glad heart and cheerful countenance,
   as to fatigue even the restless fury of their persecutors, which has
   often been compelled, when wearied out, to yield to the unconquerable
   strength of their patience, and to confess itself completely
   vanquished. And what was the cause of all this endurance? It consisted
   in their unwillingness to recede in the least point from that religion,
   the denial of which was the only circumstance that might enable them to
   escape danger, and, in many instances, to acquire glory. What then was
   the reason of the great patience which they shewed under their acute
   sufferings? It was because they believed, that when this short life was
   ended, and after the pains and distresses which they were called to
   endure on earth, they would obtain a blessed immortality. In this
   particular the combat which God has maintained with Satan, appears to
   have resembled a duel; and the result of it has been, that the Divinity
   of God's word has been raised as a superstructure out of the infamy and
   ruin of Satan.
     __________________________________________________________________

  8. THE TESTIMONY OF THE CHURCH

   The divine Omnipotence and Wisdom have principally employed these
   arguments, to prove the Divinity of this blessed word. But, that the
   Church might not defile herself by that basest vice, ingratitude of
   heart, and that she might perform a supplementary service in aid of God
   her Author and of Christ her Head, she also by her testimony adds to
   the Divinity of this word. But it is only an addition; she does not
   impart Divinity to it; her province is merely an indication of the
   Divine nature of this word, but she does not communicate to it the
   impress of Divinity. For unless this word had been Divine when there
   was no Church in existence, it would not have been possible for her
   members "to be born of this word, as of incorruptible seed," (1 Pet. i.
   23,) to become the sons of God, and, through faith in this word, "to be
   made partakers of the Divine Nature." (2 Pet. i. 4.) The very name of
   "authority" takes away from the Church the power of conferring Divinity
   on this doctrine. For Authority is derived from an Author: But the
   Church is not the Author, she is only the nursling of this word, being
   posterior to it in cause, origin, and time. We do not listen to those
   who raise this objection: "The Church is of greater antiquity than the
   scripture, because at the time when that word had not been consigned to
   writing, the Church had even then an existence." To trifle in a serious
   matter with such cavils as this, is highly unbecoming in Christians,
   unless they have changed their former godly manners and are transformed
   into Jesuits. The Church is not more ancient than this saying: "The
   seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent's head ;" (Gen. iii. 15,)
   although she had an existence before this sentence was recorded by
   Moses in Scripture. For it was by the faith which they exercised on
   this saying, that Adam and Eve became the Church of God; since, prior
   to that, they were traitors, deserters and the kingdom of Satan--that
   grand deserter and apostate. The Church is indeed the pillar of the
   truth, (1 Tim. iii. 15,) but it is built upon that truth as upon a
   foundation, and thus directs to the truth, and brings it forward into
   the sight of men. In this way the Church performs the part of a
   director and a witness to this truth, and its guardian, herald, and
   interpreter. But in her acts of interpretation, the Church is confined
   to the sense of the word itself, and is tied down to the expressions of
   Scripture: for, according to the prohibition of St. Paul, it neither
   becomes her to be wise above that which is written;" (1 Cor. iv. 6,)
   nor is it possible for her to be so, since she is hindered both by her
   own imbecility, and the depth of things divine.

   But it will reward our labour, if in a few words we examine the
   efficacy of this testimony, since such is the pleasure of the Papists,
   who constitute "the authority of the Church" the commencement and the
   termination of our certainty, when she bears witness to the scripture
   that it is the word of God. In the first place, the efficacy of the
   testimony does not exceed the veracity of the witness. The veracity of
   the Church is the veracity of men. But the veracity of men is imperfect
   and inconstant, and is always such as to give occasion to this the
   remark of truth, "All men are liars." Neither is the veracity of him
   that speaks, sufficient to obtain credit to his testimony, unless the
   veracity of him who bears witness concerning the truth appear plain and
   evident to him to whom he makes the declaration. But in what manner
   will it be possible to make the veracity of the Church plain and
   evident? This must be done, either by a notion conceived , long time
   before, or by an impression recently made on the minds of the hearers.
   But men possess no such innate notion of the veracity of the Church as
   is tantamount to that which declares, "God is true and cannot lie."
   (Tit. i. 2.) It is necessary, therefore, that it be impressed by some
   recent action; such impression being made either from within or from
   without. But the Church is not able to make any inward impression, for
   she bears her testimony by external instruments alone, and does not
   extend to the inmost parts of the soul. The impression, therefore, will
   be external; which can be no other than a display and indication of her
   knowledge and probity, as well as testimony, often truly so called. But
   all these things can produce nothing more than an opinion in the minds
   of those to whom they are offered. Opinion, therefore, and not
   knowledge, is the supreme effect of this efficacy.

   But the Papists retort, "that Christ himself established the authority
   of his Church by this saying, "He that heareth you, heareth me." (Luke
   x. 16.) When these unhappy reasoners speak thus, they seem not to be
   aware that they are establishing the authority of Scripture before that
   of the Church. For it is necessary that credence should be given to
   that expression as it was pronounced by Christ, before any authority
   can, on its account, be conceded to the Church. But the same reason
   will be as tenable in respect to the whole Scripture as to this
   expression. Let the Church then be content with that honour which
   Christ conferred on her when he made her the guardian of his word, and
   appointed her to be the director and witness to it, the herald and the
   interpreter.

   III. Yet since the arguments arising from all those observations which
   we have hitherto adduced, and from any others which are calculated to
   prove the Divinity of the scriptures, can neither disclose to us a
   right understanding of the scriptures, nor seal on our minds those
   meanings which we have understood, (although the certainty of faith
   which God demands from us, and requires us to exercise in his word,
   consists of these meanings,) it is a necessary consequence, that to all
   these things ought to be added something else, by the efficacy of which
   that certainty may be produced in our minds. And this is the very
   subject on which we are not prepared to treat in this the third part of
   our discourse
     __________________________________________________________________

  9. THE INTERNAL WITNESS OF THE HOLY SPIRIT

   We declare, therefore, and we continue to repeat the declaration, till
   the gates of hell re-echo the sound, "that the Holy Spirit, by whose
   inspiration holy men of God have spoken this word, and by whose impulse
   and guidance they have, as his amanuenses, consigned it to writing;
   that this Holy Spirit is the author of that light by the aid of which
   we obtain a perception and an understanding of the divine meanings of
   the word, and is the Effector of that Certainty by which we believe
   those meaning to be truly divine; and that He is the necessary Author,
   the all sufficient Effector." (1.) Scripture demonstrates that He is
   the necessary Author, when it says, "The things of God knoweth no man
   but the Spirit of God. (1 Cor. ii. 11.) No man can say that Jesus is
   the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost." (1 Cor. xii. 3.) (2.) But the
   Scripture introduced him as the sufficient and the more than sufficient
   Effector, when it declares, "The wisdom which God ordained before the
   world unto our glory, he hath revealed unto us by his Spirit; for the
   Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God." (1 Cor. ii.
   7, 10.) The sufficiency, therefore, of the Spirit proceeds from the
   plenitude of his knowledge of the secrets of God, and from the very
   efficacious revelation which he makes of them. This sufficiency of the
   Spirit cannot be more highly extolled than it is in a subsequent
   passage, in which the same apostle most amply commends it, by
   declaring, "he that is spiritual [a partaker of this revelation,]
   judgeth all things," (verse 15,) as having the mind of Christ through
   his Spirit, which he has received. Of the same sufficiency the Apostle
   St. John is the most illustrious herald. In his general Epistle he
   writes these words: "But the anointing which ye have received of Him,
   abideth in you; and ye need not that any man teach you; but as the same
   anointing teacheth you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie, and
   even as it hath taught you, ye shall abide in Him." (1 John ii. 27.)
   "He that believeth on the Son of God, hath the witness in himself." (1
   John v. 10.) To the Thessalonians another apostle writes thus: "Our
   Gospel came not unto you in word only, but also in power, and in the
   Holy Ghost, and in much assurance. (1 Thess. i. 3.) In this passage he
   openly attributes to the power of the Holy Ghost the Certainty by which
   the faithful receive the word of the gospel. The Papists reply, "Many
   persons boast of the revelation of the Spirit, who, nevertheless, are
   destitute of such a revelation. It is impossible, therefore, for the
   faithful safely to rest in it." Are these fair words? Away with such
   blasphemy! If the Jews glory in their Talmud and their Cabala, and the
   Mahometans in their Alcoran, and if both of these boast themselves that
   they are Churches, cannot credence therefore be given with sufficient
   safety to the scriptures of the Old and New Testaments, when they
   affirm their Divine Origin? Will the true Church be any less a Church
   because the sons of the stranger arrogate that title to themselves?
   This is the distinction between opinion and knowledge. It is their
   opinion, that they know that of which they are really ignorant. But
   they who do know it, have an assured perception of their knowledge. "It
   is the Spirit that beareth witness that the Spirit is truth" (1 John v.
   8,) that is, the doctrine and the meanings comprehended in that
   doctrine, are truth."

   "But that attesting witness of the Spirit which is revealed in us,
   cannot convince others of the truth of the Divine word." What then? It
   will convince them when it has also breathed on them: it will breathe
   its Divine afflatus on them, if they be the sons of the church, all of
   whom shall be taught of God: every man of them will hear and learn of
   the Father, and will come unto Christ." (John vi. 45.) Neither can the
   testimony of any Church convince all men of the truth and divinity of
   the sacred writings. The Papists, who arrogate to themselves
   exclusively the title of "the Church," experience the small degree of
   credit which is given to their testimonies, by those who have not
   received an afflatus from the spirit of the Roman See.

   "But it is necessary that there should be a testimony in the Church of
   such a high character as to render it imperative on all men to pay it
   due deference." True. It was the incumbent duty of the Jews to pay
   deference to the testimony of Christ when he was speaking to them; the
   Pharisees ought not to have contradicted Stephen in the midst of his
   discourse; and Jews and Gentiles, without any exception, were bound to
   yield credence to the preaching of the apostles, confirmed as it was by
   so many and such astonishing miracles. But the duties here recited,
   were disregarded by all these parties. What was the reason of this
   their neglect? The voluntary hardening of their hearts, and that
   blindness of their minds, which was introduced by the Devil.

   If the Papists still contend, that "such a testimony as this ought to
   exist in the Church, against which no one shall actually offer any
   contradiction," we deny the assertion. And experience testifies, that a
   testimony of this kind never yet had an existence, that it does not now
   exist, and (if we may form our judgment from the scriptures,) we
   certainly think that it never will exist.

   "But perhaps the Holy Ghost, who is the Author and Effector of this
   testimony, has entered into an engagement with the Church, not to
   inspire and seal on the minds of men this certainty, except through
   her, and by the intervention of her authority." The Holy Ghost does,
   undoubtedly, according to the good pleasure of his own will, make use
   of some organ or instrument in performing these his offices. But this
   instrument is the word of God, which is comprehended in the sacred
   books of scripture; an instrument produced and brought forward by
   Himself, and instructed in his truth. The Apostle to the Hebrews in a
   most excellent manner describes the efficacy which is impressed on this
   instrument by the Holy Spirit, in these words: "For the word of God is
   quick and powerful, and sharper than any two edged sword, piercing even
   to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and
   marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart."
   (Heb. iv, 10.) Its effect is called "Faith," by the Apostle. "Faith
   cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God." (Rom. x. 7.) If any
   act of the Church occurs in this place, it is that by which she is
   occupied in the sincere preaching of this word, and by which she
   sedulously exercises herself in promoting its publication. But even
   this is not so properly the occupation of the Church, as of "the
   Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers," whom Christ has
   constituted his labourers "for the edifying of his body, which is the
   Church.'" (Ephes. iv. 11.) But we must in this place deduce an
   observation from the very nature of things in genera], as well as of
   this thing in particular; it is, that the First Cause can extend much
   farther by its own action, than it is possible for an instrumental
   cause to do; and that the Holy Ghost gives to the word all that force
   which he afterwards employs, such being the great efficacy with which
   it is endued and applied, that whomsoever he only counsels by his word
   he himself persuades by imparting Divine meanings to the word, by
   enlightening the mind as with a lamp, and by inspiring and sealing it
   by his own immediate action. The Papists pretend, that certain acts are
   necessary to the production of true faith; and they say that those acts
   cannot be performed except by the judgment and testimony of the
   Church--such as to believe that any book is the production of Matthew
   or Luke--to discern between a Canonical and an Apocryphal verse, and to
   distinguish between this or that reading, according to the variation in
   different copies. But, since there is a controversy concerning the
   weight and necessity of those acts, and since the dispute is no less
   than how far they may be performed by the Church-- lest I should
   fatigue my most illustrious auditory by two great prolixity, I will
   omit at present any further mention of these topics; and will by Divine
   assistance explain them at some future opportunity.

   My most illustrious and accomplished hearers, we have already
   perceived, that both the pages of our sacred Theology are full of God
   and Christ, and of the Spirit of both of them. If any inquiry be made
   for the Object, God and Christ by the Spirit are pointed out to us. If
   we search for the Author, God and Christ by the operation of the Spirit
   spontaneously occur. If we consider the End proposed, our union with
   God and Christ offers itself--an end not to be obtained except through
   the communication of the Spirit. If we inquire concerning the Truth and
   Certainty of the doctrine; God in Christ, by means of the efficacy of
   the Holy Ghost, most clearly convinces our minds of the Truth, and in a
   very powerful manner seals the Certainty on our hearts.

   All the glory, therefore, of this revelation is deservedly due to God
   and Christ in the Holy Spirit: and most deservedly are thanks due from
   us to them, and must be given to them, through the Holy Ghost, for such
   an august and necessary benefit as this which they have conferred on
   us. But we can present to our God and Christ in the Holy Spirit no
   gratitude more grateful, and can ascribe no glory more glorious, than
   this, the application of our minds to an assiduous contemplation and a
   devout meditation on the knowledge of such a noble object. But in our
   meditations upon it, (to prevent us from straying into the paths of
   error,) let us betake ourselves to the revelation which has been made
   of this doctrine. From the word of this revelation alone, let us learn
   the wisdom of endeavouring, by an ardent desire and in an unwearied
   course, to attain unto that ultimate design which ought to be our
   constant aim--that most blessed end of our union with God and Christ.
   Let us never indulge in any doubts concerning the truth of this
   revelation; but, "the full assurance of faith being impressed upon our
   minds and hearts by the inspiration and sealing of the Holy Spirit, let
   us adhere to this word, "till[at length] we all come in the unity of
   the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man,
   unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ." (Ephes. iv.
   13.) I most humbly supplicate and intreat God our merciful Father, that
   he would be pleased to grant this great blessing to us, through the Son
   of his love, and by the communication of his Holy Spirit. And to him be
   ascribed all praise, and honour, and glory, forever and ever. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

ORATION IV

  THE PRIESTHOOD OF CHRIST

   The Noble the Lord Rector--the Very Famous, Reverend, Skillful,
   Intelligent, and Learned Men, who are the Fathers of this Most
   Celebrated University--the Rest of You, Most Worthy Strangers of Every
   Degree--and You, Most Noble and Studious Young Men, who are the Nursery
   of the Republic and the Church, and who are Increasing Every Day in
   Bloom and vigour:

   If there be any order of men in whom it is utterly unbecoming to aspire
   after the honours of this world, especially after those honours which
   are accompanied by pomp and applause, that, without doubt, is the order
   ecclesiastical--a body of men who ought to be entirely occupied with a
   zeal for God, and for the attainment of that glory which is at his
   disposal. Yet, since, according to the laudable institutions of our
   ancestors, the usage has obtained in all well regulated Universities,
   to admit no man to the office of instructor in them, who has not
   previously signalized himself by some public and solemn testimony of
   probity and scientific ability--this sacred order of men have not
   refused a compliance with such public modes of decision, provided they
   be conducted in a way that is holy, decorous, and according to
   godliness. So far, indeed, are those who have been set apart to the
   pastoral office from being averse to public proceedings of this kind,
   that they exceedingly covet and desire them alone, because they
   conceive them to be of the first necessity to the Church of Christ. For
   they are mindful of this apostolical charge, "Lay hands suddenly on no
   man ;" (1 Tim. v. 29,) and of the other, which directs that a Bishop
   and a Teacher of the Church be "apt to teach, holding fast the faithful
   word as he hath been taught, that he may be able, by sound doctrine,
   both to exhort and to convince the gainsayers." (Tit. i. 9.) I do not,
   therefore, suppose one person, in this numerous assembly, can be so
   ignorant of the public ceremonies of this University, or can hold them
   in such little estimation, as either to evince surprise at the
   undertaking in which we are now engaged, or wish to give it an
   unfavourable interpretation. But since it has always been a part of the
   custom of our ancestors, in academic festivities of this description,
   to choose some subject of discourse, the investigation of which in the
   fear of the Lord might promote the Divine glory and the profit of the
   hearers, and might excite them to pious and importunate supplication, I
   also can perceive no cause why I ought not conscientiously to comply
   with this custom. And although at the sight of this very respectable,
   numerous and learned assembly, I feel strongly affected with a sense of
   my defective eloquence and tremble not a little, yet I have selected a
   certain theme for my discourse which agrees well with my profession,
   and is full of grandeur, sublimnity and adorable majesty. In making
   choice of it, I have not been overawed by the edict of Horace, which
   says,

   "Select, all ye who write, a subject fit, A subject not too mighty for
   your wit! And ere you lay your shoulders to the wheel, Weigh well their
   strength, and all their wetness feel!"

   For this declaration is not applicable in the least to theological
   subjects, all of which by their dignity and importance exceed the
   capacity and mental energy of every human being, and of angels
   themselves. A view of them so affected the Apostle Paul, (who, rapt up
   into the third heaven, had heard words ineffable,) that they compelled
   him to break forth into this exclamation: "Who is sufficient for these
   things," (2 Cor. ii. 16.) If, therefore, I be not permitted to
   disregard the provisions of this Horatian statute, I must either
   transgress the boundaries of my profession, or be content to remain
   silent. But I am permitted to disregard the terms of this statute; and
   to do so, is perfectly lawful.

   For whatever things tend to the glory of God and to the salvation of
   men, ought to be celebrated in a devout spirit in the congregations of
   the saints, and to be proclaimed with a grateful voice. I therefore
   propose to speak on THE PRIESTHOOD OF CHRIST: Not because I have
   persuaded myself of my capability to declare anything concerning it,
   which is demanded either by the dignity of my subject, or by the
   respectability of this numerous assembly; for it will be quite
   sufficient, and I shall consider that I have abundantly discharged my
   duty, if according to the necessity of the case I shall utter something
   that will contribute to the general edification: But I choose this
   theme that I may obtain, in behalf of my oration, such grace and favour
   from the excellence of its subject, as I cannot possibly confer on it
   by any eloquence in the mode of my address. Since, however, it is
   impossible for us either to form in our minds just and holy conceptions
   about such a sublime mystery, or to give utterance to them with our
   lips, unless the power of God influence our mental faculties and our
   tongues, let us by prayer and supplication implore his present aid, in
   the name of Jesus Christ our great High Priest. "Do thou, therefore, O
   holy and merciful God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
   Fountain of all grace and truth, vouchsafe to grant thy favourable
   presence to us who are a great congregation assembled together in thy
   holy name. Sprinkle thou our spirits, souls, and bodies, with the most
   gracious dew of thy immeasurable holiness, that the converse of thy
   saints with each other may be pleasing to thee. Assist us by the grace
   of thy Holy Spirit, who may yet more and more illuminate our
   minds--imbued with the true knowledge of Thyself and thy Son; may He
   also inflame our hearts with a sincere zeal for thy glory; may He open
   my mouth and guide my tongue, that I may be enabled to declare
   concerning the Priesthood of thy Son those things which are true and
   just and holy, to the glory of thy name and to the gathering of all of
   us together in the Lord. Amen."

   Having now in an appropriate manner offered up those vows which well
   become the commencement of our undertaking, we will, by the help of
   God, proceed to the subject posed, after I have intreated all of you,
   who have been pleased to grace this solemn act of ours with your noble,
   learned and most gratifying presence, to give me that undivided
   attention which the subject deserves, while I speak on a matter of the
   most serious importance, and, according to your accustomed kindness, to
   shew me that favour and benevolence which are to me of the greatest
   necessity. That I may not abuse your patience, I engage to consult
   brevity as much as our theme will allow. But we must begin with the
   very first principles of Priesthood, that from thence the discourse may
   appropriately be brought down to the Priesthood of Christ, on which we
   profess to treat.

   First. The first of those relations which subsist between God and men,
   has respect to something given and something received. The latter
   requires another relation supplementary to itself--a relation which
   taking its commencement from men, may terminate in God; and that is, an
   acknowledgment of a benefit received, to the honour of the munificent
   Donor. It is also a debt, due on account of a benefit already
   conferred, but which is not to be paid except on the demand and
   according to the regulation of the Giver; whose intention it has always
   been, that the will of a creature should not be the measure of his
   honour. His benignity likewise is so immense, that he never requires
   from those who are under obligations to him, the grateful
   acknowledgment of the benefit communicated in the first instance,
   except when he has bound them to himself by the larger, and far
   superior benefit, of a mutual covenant. But the extreme trait in that
   goodness, is, that he has bound himself to bestow on the same persons
   favours of yet greater excellence by infinite degrees. This is the
   order which he adopts; he wishes himself first to be engaged to them,
   before they are considered to be engaged to Him. For every covenant;
   that is concluded between God and men, consists of two parts: (1.) The
   preceding promise of God, by which he obliges himself to some duty and
   to acts correspondent with that duty: and (2.) The subsequent
   definition and appointment of the duty, which, it is stipulated, shall
   in return be required of men, and according to which a mutual
   correspondence subsists between men and God. He promises, that he will
   be to them a king and a God, and that he will discharge towards them
   all the offices of a good King; while he stipulates, as a counter
   obligation, that they become his people, that in this relation they
   live according to his commands and that they ask and expect all
   blessings from his goodness. These two acts--a life according to his
   commands, and an expectation of all blessings from his
   goodness--comprise the duty of men towards God, according to the
   covenant into which he first entered with them.

   On the whole, therefore, the duties of two functions are to be
   performed between God and men who have entered into covenant with him:
   First, a regal one, which is of supreme authority: Secondly, a
   religious one, of devoted submission.

   (1.) The use of the former is in the communication of every needful
   good, and in the imposing of laws or the act of legislation. Under it
   we likewise comprehend the gift of prophecy, which is nothing more than
   the annunciation of the royal pleasure, whether it be communicated by
   God himself, or by some one of his deputies or ambassadors as a kind of
   internuncio to the covenant. That no one may think the prophetic
   office, of which the scriptures make such frequent mention, is a matter
   of little solicitude to us, we assign it the place of a substitute
   under the Chief Architect.

   (2.) But the further consideration of the regal duty being at present
   omitted, we shall proceed to a nearer inspection of that which is
   religious.. We have already deduced its origin from the act of
   covenanting; we have propounded it, in the exercise of the regal
   office, as something that is due; and we place its proper action in
   thanksgiving and intreaty. This action is required to be religiously
   performed, according to their common vocation, by every one of the
   great body of those who are in covenant; and to this end they have been
   sanctified by the word of the covenant, and have all been constituted
   priests to God, that they might offer gifts and prayers to The Most
   High. But since God loves order, he who is himself the only instance of
   order in its perfection, willed that, out of the number of those who
   were sanctified, some one should in a peculiar manner be separated to
   him; that he who was thus set apart should, by a special and
   extraordinary vocation, be qualified for the office of the priesthood;
   and that, approaching more intimately and with greater freedom to the
   throne of God, he should, in the place of his associates in the same
   covenant and religion, take the charge and management of whatever
   affairs were to be transacted before God on their account.

   From this circumstance is to be traced the existence of the office of
   the priesthood, the duties of which were to be discharged before God in
   behalf of others--an office undoubtedly of vast dignity and of special
   honour among mankind. Although the priest must be taken from among men,
   and must be appointed in their behalf, yet it does not appertain to men
   themselves, to designate whom they will to sustain that office; neither
   does it belong to any one to arrogate that honour to himself. But as
   the office itself is an act of the divine pleasure, so likewise the
   choice of the person who must discharge its duties, rests with God
   himself: and it was his will, that the office should be fulfilled by
   him who for some just reason held precedence among his kindred by
   consanguinity. This was the father and master of the family, and his
   successor was the first born. We have examples of this in the holy
   patriarchs, both before and after the deluge. We behold this expressly
   in Noah, Abraham, and Job. There are also those, (not occupying the
   lowest seats in judgment,) who say that Cain and Abel brought their
   sacrifices to Adam their father, that he might offer them to the Lord;
   and they derive this opinion from the word aykh used in the same
   passage. Though these examples are selected from the description of
   that period when sin had made its entrance into the world, yet a
   confirmation of their truth is obtained in this primitive institution
   of the human race, of which we are now treating. For it is peculiar to
   that period, that all the duties of the priesthood were confined within
   the act of offering only an eucharistic sacrifice and supplications.
   Having therefore in due form executed these functions, the priest, in
   the name of his compeers, was by the appeased Deity admitted to a
   familiar intercourse with Him, and obtained from Him a charge to
   execute among his kindred, in the name of God himself, and as "the
   messenger, or angel, of the Lord of Hosts." For the Lord revealed to
   him the Divine will and pleasure; that, on returning from his
   intercourse with God, he might declare it to the people. This will of
   God consisted of two parts: (1.) That which he required to be performed
   by his covenant people; and (2.) That which it was his wish to perform
   for their benefit. In this charge, which was committed to the priest,
   to be executed by him, the administration of prophecy was also
   included; on which account it is said, "They should seek the LAW at the
   mouth of the priest, for he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts."
   (Mal. ii. 7.) And since that second part of the Divine will was to be
   proclaimed from an assured trust and confidence in the truth of the
   Divine promises, and with a holy and affectionate feeling toward his
   own species--in that view, he was invested with a commission to
   dispense benedictions. In this manner, discharging the duties of a
   double embassy, (that of men to God, and that of God to men,) he acted,
   on both sides, the part of a Mediator of the covenant into which the
   parties had mutually entered. Nevertheless, not content with having
   conferred this honour on him whom he had sanctified, our God,
   all-bountiful, elevated him likewise to the delegated or vicarious
   dignity of the regal office, that he, bearing the image of God among
   his brethren, might then be able to administer justice to them in His
   Name, and might manage, for their common benefit, those affairs with
   which he was entrusted. From this source arose what may be considered
   the native union of the Priestly and the Kingly offices, which also
   obtained among the holy patriarchs after the entrance of sin, and of
   which express mention is made in the person of Melchizedec. This was
   signified in a general manner by the patriarch Jacob, when he declared
   Reuben, his first born son, to be "the excellency of dignity and the
   excellency of power," which were his due on account of the right of
   primogeniture. For certain reasons, however, the kingly functions were
   afterwards separated from the priestly, by the will of God, who,
   dividing them into two parts among his people the children of Israel,
   transferred the kingly office to Judah and the priestly to Levi.

   But it was proper, that this approach to God, through the oblation of
   an eucharistic sacrifice and prayers, should be made with a pure mind,
   holy affections, and with hands, as well as the other members of the
   body, free from defilement. This was required, even before the first
   transgression. "Sanctify yourselves, and be ye holy; for I the Lord
   your God am holy." (Lev. xix. 2, &c.) "God heareth not sinners." (John
   ix. 31.) "Bring no more vain oblations, for your hands are full of
   blood." (Isa. i. 15). The will of God respecting this is constant and
   perpetual. But Adam, who was the first man and the first priest, did
   not long administer his office in a becoming manner; for, refusing to
   obey God, he tasted the fruit of the forbidden tree; and, by that foul
   crime of disobedience and revolt, he at once defiled his soul which had
   been sanctified to God, and his body. By this wicked deed he both lost
   all right to the priesthood, and was in reality deprived of it by the
   Divine sentence, which was clearly signified by his expulsion from
   Paradise, where he had appeared before God in that which was a type of
   His own dwelling-place. This was in accordance with the invariable rule
   of Divine Justice: "Be it far from me, [that thou shouldst any longer
   discharge before me the duties of the priesthood:] for them that honour
   me, I will honour; and they that despise me, shall be lightly
   esteemed." (1 Sam. ii. 30.) But he did not fall alone: All whose
   persons he at that time represented and whose cause he pleaded,
   (although they had not then come into existence,) were with him cast
   down from the elevated summit of such a high dignity. Neither did they
   fall from the priesthood only, but likewise from the covenant, of which
   the priest was both the Mediator and the Internuncio; and God ceased to
   be the King and God of men, and men were no longer recognized as his
   people. The existence of the priesthood itself was at an end; for there
   was no one capable of fulfilling its duties according to the design of
   that covenant. The eucharistic sacrifice, the invocation of the name of
   God, and the gracious communication between God and men, all ceased
   together.

   Most miserable, and deserving of the deepest commiseration, was the
   condition of mankind in that state of their affairs, if this
   declaration be a true one, "Happy is the people whose God is the Lord
   !" (Psalm cxliv. 15.) And this inevitable misery would have rested upon
   Adam and his race for ever, had not Jehovah, full of mercy and
   commiseration, deigned to receive them into favour, and resolved to
   enter into another covenant with the same parties; not according to
   that which they had transgressed, and which was then become obsolete
   and had been abolished; but into a new covenant of grace. But the
   Divine justice and truth could not permit this to be done, except
   through the agency of an umpire and surety, who might undertake the
   part of a Mediator between the offended God and sinners. Such a
   Mediator could not then approach to God with an eucharistic sacrifice
   for benefits conferred upon the human race, or with prayers which might
   intreat only for a continuance and an increase of them: But he had to
   approach into the Divine presence to offer sacrifice for the act of
   hostility which they had committed against God by transgressing his
   commandment, and to offer prayers for obtaining the remission of their
   transgressions. Hence arose the necessity of an Expiatory Sacrifice;
   and, on that account, a new priesthood was to be instituted, by the
   operation of which the sin that had been committed might be expiated,
   and access to the throne of God's grace might be granted to man through
   a sinner: this is the priesthood which belongs to our Christ, the
   Anointed One, alone.

   But God, who is the Supremely Wise Disposer of times and seasons, would
   not permit the discharge of the functions appertaining to this
   priesthood to commence immediately after the formation of the world,
   and the introduction of sin. It was his pleasure, that the necessity of
   it should be first correctly understood and appreciated, by a
   conviction on men's consciences of the multitude, heinousness and
   aggravated nature of their sins. It was also his will, that the minds
   of men should be affected with a serious and earnest desire for it, yet
   so that they might in the mean time be supported against despair,
   arising from a consciousness of their sins, which could not be removed
   except by means of that Divine priesthood, the future commencement of
   which inspired them with hope and confidence. All these purposes God
   effected by the temporary institution of that typical priesthood, the
   duties of which infirm and sinful men "after the law of a carnal
   commandment" could perform, by the immolation of beasts sanctified for
   that service; which priesthood was at first established in different
   parts of the world, and afterwards among the Israelites, who were
   specially elected to be a sacerdotal nation. When the blood of beasts
   was shed, in which was their life, (Lev. xvii. 14) the people
   contemplated, in the death of the animals, their own demerits, for the
   beasts had not sinned that they by death should be punished as victims
   for transgression. After investigating this subject with greater
   diligence, and deliberately weighing it in the equal balances of their
   judgment, they plainly perceived and understood that their sins could
   not possibly be expiated by those sacrifices, which were of a species
   different from their own, and more despicable and mean than human
   beings. From these premises they must of necessity have concluded,
   that, notwithstanding they offered those animals, they in such an act
   delivered to God nothing less than their own bond, sealing it in his
   presence with an acknowledgment of their personal sins, and confessing
   the debt which they had incurred. Yet, because these sacrifices were of
   Divine Institution, and because God received them at the hands of men
   as incense whose odour was fragrant and agreeable, from these
   circumstances the offenders conceived the hope of obtaining favour and
   pardon, reasoning thus within themselves, as did Sampson's mother: "If
   the Lord were pleased to kill us, he would not have received
   burnt-offering and a meat-offering at our hands." (Judges xiii. 23.)
   With such a hope they strengthened their spirits that were ready to
   faint, and, confiding in the Divine promise, they expected in all the
   ardour of desire the dispensation of a priesthood which was prefigured
   under the typical one; "searching what, or what manner of time, the
   Spirit of Christ which was in them did signify, when it testified
   beforehand the Sufferings of Christ, and the Glory that should follow."
   (1 Pet. i. 11.) But, since the mind pants after the very delightful
   consideration of this priesthood, our oration hastens towards it; and,
   having some regard to the lateness of the hour, and wishing not to
   encroach on your comfort, we shall omit any further allusion to that
   branch of the priesthood which has hitherto occupied our attention.

   Secondly. In discoursing on the Priesthood of Christ, we will confine
   our observations to three points; and, on condition that you receive
   the succeeding part of my oration with that kindness and attention
   which you have hitherto manifested, and which I still hope and desire
   to receive, we will describe: First. The Imposing of the Office.
   Secondly. Its Execution and Administration. And Thirdly. The Fruits of
   the Office thus Administered, and the Utility Which We Derive From It.

   I. In respect to the Imposing of the Office, the subject itself
   presents us with three topics to be discussed in order. (1.) The person
   who imposes it. (2.) The person on whom it is imposed, or to whom it is
   entrusted. And (3.) The manner of his appointment, and of his
   undertaking this charge.

   1. The person imposing it is God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
   Since this act of imposing belongs to the economy and dispensation of
   our salvation, the persons who are comprised under this one Divine
   Monarchy are to be distinctly considered according to the rule of the
   scriptures, which ought to have the precedence in this inquiry, and
   according to the rules and guidance of the orthodox Fathers that agree
   with those scriptures. It is J EHOVAH who imposes this office, and who,
   while the princes of darkness fret themselves and rage in vain, says to
   his Messiah, "Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten thee. Ask of
   me, and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the
   uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession." (Psalm ii. 8.) He it
   is who, when he commanded Messiah to sit at his right hand, repeated
   his holy and revered word with an oath, saying, "Thou art a Priest
   forever after the order of Melchizedec." (Psalm cx. 4.) This is He who
   imposes the office, and that by a right the most just and deserved. For
   "with him we have to do, who, dwelling in the light unto which no man
   can approach," remains continually in the seat of his Majesty. He
   preserves his own authority safe and unimpaired to himself, "without
   any abasement or lessening of his person," as the voice of antiquity
   expresses it; and retains entire, within himself, the right of
   demanding satisfaction from the sinner for the injuries which He has
   sustained. From this right he has not thought fit to recede, or to
   resign any part of it, on account of the rigid inflexibility of his
   justice, according to which he hates iniquity and does not permit a
   wicked person to dwell in his presence. This, therefore, is the Divine
   Person in whose hands rest both the right and the power of imposition;
   the fact of his having also the will, is decided by the very act of
   imposition.

   But an inquiry must be made into the Cause of this imposition which we
   shall not find, except, first, in the conflict between justice and
   gracious mercy; and, afterwards, in their amicable agreement, or rather
   their junction by means of wisdom's conciliating assistance.

   (1.) Justice demanded, on her part, the punishment due to her from a
   sinful creature; and this demand she the more rigidly enforced, by the
   greater equity with which she had threatened it, and the greater truth
   with which it had been openly foretold and declared.

   Gracious Mercy, like a pious mother, moving with bowels of
   commiseration, desired to avert that punishment in which was placed the
   extreme misery of the creature. For she thought that, though the
   remission of that punishment was not due to the cause of it, yet such a
   favour ought to be granted to her by a right of the greatest equity;
   because it is one of her chief properties to "rejoice against
   judgment." (James ii. 13.)

   Justice, tenacious of her purpose, rejoined, that the throne of grace,
   she must confess, was sublimely elevated above the tribunal of justice:
   but she could not bear with patient indifference that no regard should
   be paid to her, and her suit not to be admitted, while the authority of
   managing the whole affair was to be transferred to mercy. Since,
   however, it was a part of the oath administered to justice when she
   entered into office, "that she should render to every one his own," she
   would yield entirely to mercy, provided a method could be devised by
   which her own inflexibility could be declared, as well as the excess of
   her hatred to sin.

   (2.) But to find out that method, was not the province of Mercy. It was
   necessary, therefore, to call in the aid of Wisdom to adjust the mighty
   difference, and to reconcile by an amicable union those two combatants
   that were, in God, the supreme protectresses of all equity and
   goodness. Being called upon, she came, and at once discovered a method,
   and affirmed that it was possible to render to each of them that which
   belonged to her; for if the punishment due to sin appeared desirable to
   Justice and odious to Mercy, it might be transmuted into an expiatory
   sacrifice, the oblation of which, on account of the voluntary suffering
   of death, (which is the punishment adjudged to sin,) might appease
   Justice, and open such a way for Mercy as she had desired. Both of them
   instantly assented to this proposal, and made a decree according to the
   terms of agreement settled by Wisdom, their common arbitrator.

   2. But, that we may come to the Second Point, a priest was next to be
   sought, to offer the sacrifice: For that was a function of the
   priesthood. A sacrifice was likewise to be sought; and with this
   condition annexed to it, that the same person should be both priest and
   sacrifice. This was required by the plan of the true priesthood and
   sacrifice, from which the typical and symbolical greatly differs. But
   in the different orders of creatures neither sacrifice nor priest could
   be found.

   It was not possible for an angel to become a priest; because "he was to
   be taken from among men and to be ordained from men in things
   pertaining to God." (Heb. v. 1.) Neither could an angel be a sacrifice;
   because it was not just that the death of an angel should be an
   expiation for a crime which a man had perpetrated: And if this had even
   been most proper, yet man could never have been induced to believe that
   an angelical sacrifice had been offered by an angel for him, or, if it
   had been so offered, that it was of the least avail. Application was
   then to be made to men themselves. But, among them, not one could be
   found in whom it would have been a becoming act to execute the office
   of the priesthood, and who had either ability or inclination for the
   undertaking. For all men were sinners; all were terrified with a
   consciousness of their delinquency; and all were detained captive under
   the tyranny of sin and Satan. It was not lawful for a sinner to
   approach to God, who is pure Light, for the purpose of offering
   sacrifice; because, being affrighted by his own internal perception of
   his crime, he could not support a sight of the countenance of an
   incensed God, before whom it was still necessary that he should appear.
   Being placed under the dominion of sin and Satan, he was neither
   willing, nor had he the power to will, to execute an office, the duties
   of which were to be discharged for the benefit of others, out of love
   to them. The same consideration likewise tends to the rejection of
   every human sacrifice. Yet the priest was to be taken from among men,
   and the oblation to God was to consist of a human victim.

   In this state of affairs, the assistance of Wisdom was again required
   in the Divine Council. She declared that a man must be born from among
   men, who might have a nature in common with the rest of his brethren,
   that, being in all things tempted as they were, he might be able to
   sympathize with others in their sufferings; and yet, that he should
   neither be reckoned in the order of the rest, nor should be made man
   according to the law of the primitive creation and benediction; that he
   should not be under dominion of sin; that he should be one in whom
   Satan could find nothing worthy of condemnation, who should not be
   tormented by a consciousness of sin, and who should not even know sin,
   that is, one who should be "born in the likeness of sinful flesh, and
   yet without sin. For such a high priest became us, who is holy,
   harmless, undefiled and separate from sinners." (Heb. vii. 26.) But,
   that he might have a community of nature with men, he ought to be born
   of a human being; and, that he might have no participation in crime
   with them, but might be holy, he ought to be conceived by the Holy
   Ghost, because sanctification is his proper work. By the Holy Spirit,
   the nativity which was above and yet according to nature, might through
   the virtue of the mystery, restore nature, as it surpassed her in the
   transcendent excellence of the miracle. But the dignity of this
   priesthood was greater, and its functions more weighty and important,
   than man even in his pure state was competent to sustain or discharge.
   The benefits also to be obtained by it, infinitely exceeded the value
   of man when in his greatest state of purity. Therefore, the Word of
   God, who from the beginning was with God, and by whom the worlds, and
   all things visible and invisible, were created, ought himself to be
   made flesh, to undertake the office of the priesthood, and to offer his
   own flesh to God as a sacrifice for the life of the world. We now have
   the person who was entrusted with the priesthood, and to whom the
   province was assigned of atoning for the common offense: It is Jesus
   Christ, the Son of God and of man, a high priest of such great
   excellence, that the transgression whose demerits have obtained this
   mighty Redeemer, might almost seem to have been a happy circumstance.

   3. Let us proceed to the mode of its being imposed or undertaken. This
   mode is according to covenant, which, on God's part, received an oath
   for its confirmation. As it is according to covenant, it becomes a
   solemnity appointed by God, with whom rests the appointment to the
   priesthood. For the Levitical priesthood was conferred on Levi
   according to covenant, as the Lord declares by the prophet Malachi: "My
   covenant was with him of life and peace." (ii, 5.) It is, however,
   peculiar to this priesthood of Christ, that the covenant on which it is
   founded, was confirmed by an oath. Let us briefly consider each of
   them.

   The covenant into which God entered with our High Priest, Jesus Christ,
   consisted, on the part of God, of the demand of an action to be
   performed, and of the promise of an immense remuneration. On the part
   of Christ, our High Priest, it consisted of an accepting of the
   Promise, and a voluntary engagement to Perform the Action. First, God
   required of him, that he should lay down his soul as a victim in
   sacrifice for sin, (Isa. liii. 11,) that he should give his flesh for
   the light of the world, (John vi. 51,) and that he should pay the price
   of redemption for the sins and the captivity of the human race. God
   "promised" that, if he performed all this, "he should see a seed whose
   days should be prolonged," (Isa. liii. 11,) and that he should be
   himself "an everlasting Priest after the order of Melchizedec," (cx,
   4,) that is, he should, by the discharge of his priestly functions, be
   elevated to the regal dignity. Secondly, Christ, our High Priest,
   accepted of these conditions, and permitted the province to be assigned
   to him of atoning for our transgressions, exclaiming "Lo, I come that I
   may do thy will, O my God." (Psalm xl. 8.) But he accepted them under a
   stipulation, that, on completing his great undertaking, he should
   forever enjoy the honour of a priesthood similar to that of
   Melchizedec, and that, being placed on his royal throne, he might, as
   King of Righteousness and Prince of Peace, rule in righteousness the
   people subject to his sway, and might dispense peace to his people. He,
   therefore, "for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross,
   despising the shame," (Heb. xii. 2,) that, "being anointed with the oil
   of gladness above his fellows," (Psalm xlv. 7,) he might sit forever in
   the throne of equity at the right hand of the throne of God.

   Great, indeed, was the condescension of the all-powerful God in being
   willing to treat with our High Priest rather in the way of covenant,
   than by a display of his authority. And strong were the pious
   affections of our High Priest, who did not refuse to take upon himself,
   on our account, the discharge of those difficult and arduous duties
   which were full of pain, trouble, and misery. Most glorious act,
   performed by thee, O Christ, who art infinite in goodness! Thou great
   High Priest, accept of the honours due to thy pious affection, and
   continue in that way to proceed to glory, to the complete consecration
   of our salvation! For it was the will of God, that the duties of the
   office should be administered from a voluntary and disinterested zeal
   and affection for his glory and the salvation of sinners; and it was a
   deed worthy of his abundant benignity, to recompense with a large
   reward the voluntary promptitude which Christ exhibited.

   God added an oath to the covenant, both for the purpose of confirming
   it, and as a demonstration of the dignity and unchangeable nature of
   that priesthood. Though the constant and unvarying veracity of God's
   nature might very properly set aside the necessity of an oath, yet as
   he had conformed to the customs of men in their method of solemnizing
   agreements, it was his pleasure by an oath to confirm his covenant;
   that our High Priest, relying in assured hope on the two-fold and
   immovable anchor of the promise and of the oath, "might despise the
   shame and endure the cross." The immutability and perpetuity of this
   priesthood have been pointed out by the oath which was added to the
   covenant. For whatever that be which God confirms by an oath, it is
   something eternal and immutable.

   But it may be asked, "Are not all the words which God speaks, all the
   promises which he makes, and all the covenants into which he enters, of
   the same nature, even when they are unaccompanied by the sanctity of an
   oath ," Let me be permitted to describe the difference between the two
   cases here stated, and to prove it by an important example. There are
   two methods or plans by which it might be possible for man to arrive at
   a state of righteousness before God, and to obtain life from him. The
   one is according to righteousness through the law, by works and "of
   debt;" the other is according to mercy through the gospel, "by grace,
   and through faith:" These two methods are so constituted as not to
   allow both of them to be in a course of operation at the same time; but
   they proceed on the principle, that when the first of them is made
   void, a vacancy may be created for the second. In the beginning,
   therefore, it was the will of God to prescribe to man the first of
   these methods; which arrangement was required by his righteousness and
   the primitive institution of mankind. But it was not his pleasure to
   deal strictly with man according to the process of that legal covenant,
   and peremptorily to pronounce a destructive sentence against him in
   conformity with the rigor of the law. Wherefore, he did not subjoin an
   oath to that covenant, lest such an addition should have served to
   point out its immutability, a quality which God would not permit it to
   possess. The necessary consequence of this was, that when the first
   covenant was made void through sin, a vacancy was created by the good
   pleasure of God for another and a better covenant, in the manifestation
   of which he employed an oath, because it was to be the last and
   peremptory one respecting the method of obtaining righteousness and
   life. "By myself have I sworn, saith the Lord, that in thy seed shall
   all the nations of the earth be blessed." (Gen. xxii. 18.) "As I live,
   saith the Lord, have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die,
   and not that he should return from his ways and live" (Ezek. xviii.
   23.) "So I swear in my wrath, They shall not enter into my rest. And to
   whom swear he that they should not enter into his rest, but to them
   that believed not? So we see that they could not enter in because of
   unbelief." (Heb. iii. 11, 18.) For the same reason, it is said, "The
   wrath of God, [from which it is possible for sinners to be liberated by
   faith in Christ,] abides on those who are unbelievers." (John iii. 36.)
   A similar process is observed in relation to the priesthood. For he did
   not confirm with an oath the Levitical priesthood, which had been
   imposed until the time of reformation." (Heb. ix. 10.) But because it
   was his will that the priesthood of Christ should be everlasting, he
   ratified it by an oath. The apostle to the Hebrews demonstrates the
   whole of this subject in the most nervous style, by quotations from the
   110th Psalm. Blessed are we in whose behalf God was willing to swear!
   but most miserable shall we be, if we do not believe on him who swears.
   The greatest dignity is likewise obtained to this priesthood, and
   imparted to it, by the addition of an oath, which elevates it far above
   the honour to which that of Levi attained. "For the law of a carnal
   commandment maketh men priests who have infirmities, and are sinners,
   to offer both gifts and sacrifices, that could not make him perfect who
   did the service, as pertaining to the conscience;" (Heb. ix. 9) neither
   could they abolish sin, or procure heavenly blessings. "But the words
   of the oath, which was since the law, constituteth the Son a High
   Priest consecrated forevermore, who, after the power of an endless life
   and through the Eternal Spirit, offers himself without spot to God, and
   by that one offering, he perfects forever them that are sanctified,
   their consciences being purified to serve the living God: by how much
   also it was a more excellent covenant, by so much the more ought it to
   be confirmed, since it was established upon better promises: (Heb.
   7-10,) and that which God hath deigned to honour with the sanctity of
   an oath, should be viewed as an object of the most momentous
   importance.

   II. We have spoken to the act of Imposing the priesthood, as long as
   our circumscribed time will allow us. Let us contemplate its Execution,
   in which we have to consider the duties to be performed, and in them
   the feeling and condition of who performs them. The functions to be
   executed were two:

   (1.) The Oblation of an expiatory sacrifice, and (2.) Prayer.

   1. The Oblation was preceded by a preparation through the deepest
   privation and abasement, the most devoted obedience, vehement
   supplications, and the most exquisitely painful experience of human
   infirmities, on each of which it is not now necessary to speak. The
   oblation consists of two parts succeeding each other: The First is the
   immolation or sacrifice of the body of Christ, by the shedding of his
   blood on the altar of the cross, which was succeeded by death--thus
   paying the price of redemption for sins by suffering the punishment due
   to them. The Other Part consists of the offering of his body
   re-animated and sprinkled with the blood which he shed--a symbol of the
   price which he has paid, and of the redemption which he has obtained.
   The First Part of this oblation was to be performed without the Holy of
   Holies, that is, on earth, because no effusion of blood can take place
   in heaven, since it is necessarily succeeded by death For death has no
   more sway in heaven, in the presence and sight of the majesty of the
   true God, than sin itself has, which contains within it the deserts of
   death, and as death contains within itself the punishment of sin. For
   thus says the scriptures, "The Son of man came, not to be ministered
   unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many." (Matt.
   xx. 28.) "For this is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for
   many for the remission of sins." (Matt. xxvi. 28.) "Christ Jesus gave
   himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time." (1 Tim. ii. 6).
   But the Second Part of this offering was to be accomplished in heaven,
   in the Holy of Holies. For that body which had suffered the punishment
   of death and had been recalled to life, was entitled to appear before
   the Divine Majesty besprinkled with its own blood, that, remaining thus
   before God as a continual memorial, it might also be a perpetual
   expiation for transgressions. On this subject, the Apostle says: "Into
   the second tabernacle went the High Priest alone once every year, not
   without blood, which he offered for himself, and for the errors of the
   people. But Christ being come a High Priest of good things to come, not
   by the blood of goat, and calves, but by his own blood he entered in
   once into the Holy Place, having obtained eternal redemption for us;"
   (Heb. ix. 11) that is, by his own blood already poured out and
   sprinkled upon him, that he might appear with it in the presence of
   God. That act, being once performed, was never repeated; "for in that
   he died, he died unto sin once." But this is a perpetual act; "for in
   that he liveth, he liveth unto God." (Rom. vi. 10.) "This man, because
   he continueth ever, hath an unchangeable priesthood." (Heb. vii. 24)
   The former was the act of the Lamb to be slain, the latter, that of the
   Lamb already slain and raised again from death to life. The one was
   completed in a state of the deepest humiliation, the other in a state
   of glory; and both of them out of a consummate affection for the glory
   of God and the salvation of sinners. Sanctified by the anointing of the
   Spirit, he completed the former act; and the latter was likewise his
   work, when he had been further consecrated by his sufferings and
   sprinkled with his own blood. By the former, therefore, he sanctified
   himself, and made a kind of preparation on earth that he might be
   qualified to discharge the functions of the latter in heaven.

   2. The Second of the two functions to be discharged, was the act of
   prayer and intercession, the latter of which depends upon the former.
   Prayer is that which Christ offers for himself, and intercession is
   what he offers for believers; each of which is most luminously
   described to us by John, in the seventeenth chapter of his Gospel,
   which contains a perpetual rule and exact canon of the prayers and
   intercessions which Christ offers in heaven to his Father. For although
   that prayer was recited by Christ while he remained upon earth, yet it
   properly belongs to his sublime state of exaltation in heaven: and it
   was his will that it should be described in his word, that we on earth,
   might derive from it perpetual consolation. Christ offers up a prayer
   to the Father for himself, according to the Father's command and
   promise combined, "Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for
   thine inheritance." (Psalm ii. 8.) Christ had regard to this promise,
   when he said, "Father, glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify
   thee, as thou hast given him power over all flesh, that he should give
   eternal life to as many as thou hast given him." This sort of intreaty
   must be distinguished from those "supplications which Christ, in the
   days of his flesh, offered up to the Father, with strong cries and
   tears;" (Heb. v. 7,) for by them he intreated to be delivered from
   anguish, while by the other he asks, "to see his seed whose days should
   be prolonged, and to behold the pleasure of the Lord which should
   prosper in his hands." (Isa. liii. 10.) But, for the faithful,
   intercession is made, of which the apostle thus speaks, "Who is he that
   condemneth, It is Christ that died, yea, rather, that is risen again,
   who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for
   us." (Rom. viii. 34) And, in the Epistle to the Hebrews, he says,
   "Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto
   God by him, seeing He ever liveth to make intercession for them" (vii,
   25.) But Christ is said to intercede for believers, to the exclusion of
   the world, because, after he had offered a sacrifice sufficient to take
   away the sins of all mankind, he was consecrated a great "High Priest
   to preside over the house of God," (Heb. x. 21,) "which house those are
   who hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto
   the end." (iii, 6.) Christ discharges the whole of this part of his
   function in heaven, before the face of the Divine Majesty; for there,
   also, is the royal seat and the throne of God, to which, when we are
   about to pray, we are commanded to lift up our eyes and our minds. But
   he executes this part of his office, not in anguish of spirit, or in a
   posture of humble genuflection, as though fallen down before the knees
   of the Father, but in the confidence of the shedding of his own blood,
   which, sprinkled as it is on his sacred body, he continually presents,
   as an object of sight before his Father, always turning it towards his
   sacred countenance. The entire efficacy of this function depends on the
   dignity and value of the blood effused and sprinkled over the body;
   for, by his blood-shedding, he opened a passage for himself "into the
   holiest, within the veil." From which circumstance we may with the
   greatest certainty conclude, that his prayers will never be rejected,
   and that whatever we shall ask in his name, will, in virtue of that
   intercession, be both heard and answered.

   The sacerdotal functions being thus executed, God, the Father, mindful
   of his covenant and sacred oath, not only continued the priesthood with
   Christ forever, but elevated him likewise to the regal dignity, "all
   power being given unto him in heaven and in earth, (Matt. xxviii. 18,)
   also power over all flesh: (John xvii. 2,) a name being conferred on
   him which is far above all principality, and might, and dominion, and
   every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that
   which is to come, (Ephes. i. 21,) angels, and authorities, and powers
   being made subject unto him," (1 Pet. iii. 22,) that he might be the
   Christ and the Lord of his whole Israel, King of Kings and Lord of
   Lords. By this admirable covenant, therefore, God hath united those two
   supreme functions in one, even in Christ Jesus, and has thus performed
   his promise, by which he had sworn that this Priest should be forever
   after the order of Melchizedec, "who was at once a King and a Priest;
   and is to the present time without beginning of days or end of life,"
   because his genealogy is not described in the Scriptures, which in this
   case are subservient to the figure. This conjunction of the sacerdotal
   and regal functions is the highest point and the extreme limit of all
   the divine work, a never ending token of the justice and the mercy of
   God attempered together for the economy of our salvation, a very
   luminous and clear evidence of the most excellent glory of God, and an
   immovable foundation for the certainty of obtaining salvation through
   this royal Priest. If man is properly styled "the extreme Colophon of
   the creation," "a microcosm," on account of the union of his body and
   soul, "an epitome of the whole world," and "the marriage of the
   Universe," what judgment shall we form of this conjunction, which
   consists of a most intimate and inseparable union of the whole church
   of believers and of God himself, "who dwells in the light unto which no
   man can approach," and by what amplitude of title shall we point out
   its divinity. This union hath a name above every name that can be
   named. It is ineffable, inconceivable, and incomprehensible. If,
   chiefly in respect to this I shall say, that Christ is styled "the
   brightness of the Father's glory," "the express image of his person"
   and "the image of the invisible God," I shall have expressed its
   excellency as fully as it is possible to do.

   What can be a more illustrious instance of the admixture of justice
   with mercy than that even the Son of God, when he had "made himself of
   no reputation and assumed the form of a servant," could not be
   constituted a King except through a discharge of the sacerdotal
   functions; and that all those blessings which he had to bestow as a
   King on his subjects, could not be asked except through the priesthood,
   and which, when obtained from God, could not, (except through the
   intervention of this royal Mediator,) be communicated by his vicarious
   distribution under God? What can be a stronger and a better proof of
   the certainty of obtaining salvation through Christ, than that he has,
   by the discharge of his sacerdotal functions in behalf of men, asked
   and procured it for men, and that, being constituted a King through the
   priesthood, he has received salvation from the Father to be dispensed
   to them? In these particulars consists the perfection of the divine
   glory.

   III. But this consideration, I perceive, introduces us, almost
   imperceptibly, to the third and last portion of our subject, in which
   we have engaged to treat on THE FRUITS OF THE SACERDOTAL OFFICE in its
   administration by Christ. We will reduce all these fruits, though they
   are innumerable, to four chief particulars; and, since we hasten to the
   end of this discourse, we bind ourselves down to extreme brevity. These
   benefits are, (1.) The concluding and the confirmation of a New
   Covenant; (2.) The asking, obtaining, and application of all the
   blessings necessary for the salvation of the human race; (3.) The
   institution of a new priesthood, both eucharistic and royal; and (4.)
   lastly, The extreme and final bringing to God of all his covenant
   people.

   1. The FIRST UTILITY is the contracting and the confirmation of a New
   Covenant, in which is the direct way to solid felicity.

   We rejoice and glory, that this has been obtained by the priesthood of
   Christ. For since the first covenant had been made weak through sin and
   the flesh, and was not capable of bringing righteousness and life, it
   was necessary, either to enter into another, or that we should be
   forever expelled from God's presence. Such a covenant could not be
   contracted between a just God and sinful men, except in consequence of
   a reconciliation, which it pleased God, the offended party, should be
   perfected by the blood of our High Priest, to be poured out on the
   altar of the cross. He who was at once the officiating priest and the
   Lamb for sacrifice, poured out his sacred blood, and thus asked and
   obtained for us a reconciliation with God. When this great offering was
   completed, it was possible for the reconciled parties to enter into an
   agreement. Hence, it pleased God, that the same High Priest who had
   acted as Mediator and Umpire in this reconciliation, should, with the
   very blood by which he had effected their union, go between the two
   parties, as a middle-man, or, in the capacity of an ambassador, and as
   a herald to bear tidings of war or peace, with the same blood as that
   by which the consciences of those who were included in the provisions
   of the covenant, being sprinkled, might be purged from dead works and
   sanctified; with the very blood, which, sprinkled upon himself, might
   always appear in the sight of God; and with the same blood as that by
   which all things in the heavens might be sprinkled and purified.
   Through the intervention, therefore, of this blood, another covenant
   was contracted, not one of works, but of faith, not of the law, but of
   grace, not an old, but a new one--and new, not because it was later
   than the first, but because it was never to be abrogated or repealed;
   and because its force and vigour should perpetually endure. "For that
   which decayeth and waxeth old, is ready to vanish away." (Heb. viii.
   13). If such a covenant as is described in this quotation should be
   again contracted, in the several ages which succeed each other, changes
   ought frequently to occur in it; and, all former covenants being
   rendered obsolete, others more recent ought to succeed. But it was
   necessary, at length, that a pause should occur in one of them, and
   that such a covenant should at once be made as might endure forever. It
   was also to be ratified with blood. But how was it possible to be
   confirmed with blood of greater value than that of the High Priest, who
   was the Son, both of God and man. But the covenant of which we are now
   treating, was ratified with that blood; it was, therefore, a new one,
   and never to be annulled. For the perpetual presence and sight of such
   a great High Priest, sprinkled with his own blood, will not suffer the
   mind of his Father to be regardless of the covenant ratified by it, or
   his sacred breast to be moved with repentance. With what other blood
   will it be possible for the consciences of those in covenant to be
   cleansed and sanctified to God, if, after having become parties to the
   covenant of grace, they pollute themselves with any crime, "There
   remaineth no more sacrifice for sins, if any man have trodden under
   foot this High Priest, and counted the blood of the covenant wherewith
   he was sanctified, an unholy thing." (Heb. x. 29). The covenant,
   therefore, which has been concluded by the intervention of this blood
   and this. High Priest, is a new one, and will endure forever.

   2. The SECOND FRUIT is the asking, obtaining, and application, of all
   the blessings necessary to those who are in covenant for the salvation
   both of soul and body. For, since every covenant must be confirmed by
   certain promises, it was necessary that this also should have its
   blessings, by which it might be sanctioned, and those in covenant
   rendered happy.

   (1.) Among those blessings, the remission of sins first offers itself;
   according to the tenor of the New Covenant, "I will be merciful to
   their unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities will I
   remember no more." (Heb. viii. 12). But the scripture testifies, that
   Christ has asked this blessing by his blood, when it says, "This is my
   blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many, for the remission
   of sins." (Matt. xxvi. 28). The scripture also proves his having
   obtained such a blessing by the discharge of the same office, in these
   words: "By his own blood Christ entered in once into the holy place,
   HAVING OBTAINED eternal redemption for us." (Heb. ix. 12.) It adds its
   testimony to the application, saying, "In Christ WE HAVE REDEMPTION
   through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of
   his grace." (Ephes. i. 7.)

   (2.) This necessary blessing is succeeded by adoption into sons and by
   a right to the heavenly inheritance: And we owe it to the Priesthood of
   Christ, that this blessing was asked and obtained for us, as well as
   communicated to us. For he being the proper and only begotten Son of
   the Father, and the sole heir of all his Father's blessings, was
   unwilling to enjoy such transcendent benefits alone, and desired to
   have co-heirs and partners, whom he might anoint with the oil of his
   gladness, and might receive into a participation of that inheritance.
   He made an offering, therefore, of his soul for sin, that, the travail
   of his soul being finished, he might see his seed prolonged in their
   days--the seed of God which might come into a participation with him
   both of name and inheritance. "He was made under the law, to redeem
   them that were under the law, that we might receive THE ADOPTION OF
   SONS." (Gal. iv. 5). According to the command of the Father, he asked,
   that the Heathen might be given to him for an inheritance. By these
   acts, therefore, which are peculiar to his priesthood, he asked for
   this right of adoption in behalf of his believing people, and obtained
   it for the purpose of its being communicated to them, nay, in fact, he
   himself became the donor. "For to as many as believed on his name
   Christ gave power to become the sons of God." (John i. 12). Through him
   and in regard to him, God has adopted us for sons, who are beloved in
   him the Son of his love. He, therefore, is the sole heir, by whose
   death the inheritance comes to others; which circumstance was predicted
   by the perfidious husbandmen, (Mark xii. 7,) who, being Scribes and
   Pharisees, uttered at that time a remarkable truth, although they were
   ignorant of such a great mystery.

   (3.) But because it is impossible to obtain benefits of this magnitude
   except in union with the High Priest himself, it was expected of him
   that he should ask and obtain the gift of the HOLY SPIRIT, the bond of
   that union, and should pour it out on his own people. But since the
   spirit of grace is the token as well as the testimony of the love of
   God towards us, and the earnest of our inheritance, Christ could not
   ask this great gift till a reconciliation had taken place, and to
   effect this was the duty of the priest. When, therefore, this
   reconciliation was effected, he asked of his Father another Comforter
   for his people, and his request was granted. Being elevated to the
   right hand of God, he obtained this Paraclete promised in the terms of
   the sacerdotal covenant; and, when he had procured this Spirit, he
   poured it out in a most copious manner on his followers, as the
   scripture says, "Therefore being by the right hand of God exalted, and
   having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, he hath
   shed forth this which ye now see and hear." (Acts ii. 33.)

   That the asking, the obtaining, and the communication of all these
   blessings, have flowed from the functions of the priesthood, God has
   testified by a certain seal of the greatest sanctity, when he
   constituted Christ the Testator of these very blessings, which office
   embraces conjointly both the full possession of the good things devised
   as legacies in the Will, and absolute authority over their
   distribution.

   3. The THIRD FRUIT of Christ's administration is the institution of a
   new priesthood both eucharistic and regal, and our sanctification for
   the purpose of performing its duties; for when a New Covenant was
   concluded, it was needful to institute a new eucharistic priesthood,
   (because the old one had fallen into disuse,) and to sanctify priests
   to fulfill its duties.

   (1.) Christ, by his own priesthood, completed such an institution; and
   he sanctified us by a discharge of its functions. This was the order in
   which he instituted it:

   First, he constituted us his debtors, and as bound to thanksgiving on
   account of the immense benefits procured for us and bestowed upon us by
   his priesthood. Then he instructed us how to offer sacrifices to God,
   our souls and bodies being sanctified and consecrated by the sprinkling
   of his blood and by the unction of the Holy Spirit, that, if they were
   offered as sacrifices to God, they might meet with acceptance. It was
   also his care to have an altar erected in heaven before the throne of
   grace, which being sprinkled with his own blood he consecrated to God,
   that the sacrifices of his faithful people, being placed upon it, might
   continually appear before the face of the Majesty of heaven and in
   presence of his throne. Lastly, he placed on that altar an eternal and
   never-ceasing fire--the immeasurable favour of God, with which the
   sacrifices on that altar might be kindled and reduced to ashes.

   (2.) But it was also necessary that priests should be consecrated: the
   act of consecration, therefore, was performed by Christ, as the Great
   High Priest, by his own blood. St. John says, in the Apocalypse, "He
   hath loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, and hath
   made us kings and priests unto God and his Father." (i, 6.) "Thou hast
   redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and
   people, and nation; and hast made us unto our God kings and priests."
   (v, 10.) Not content to have us joint-heirs in the participation of his
   inheritance, he willed that we should likewise partake of the same
   dignity as that which he enjoyed. But he made us partners with him of
   that dignity in such a manner, as in the mean time always to retain
   within himself the first place, "as Head of his body the Church, the
   first-born among many brethren and the Great High Priest who presides
   over the whole of the House of God." To Him, we, who are "born again,"
   ought to deliver our sacrifices, that by him they may be further
   offered to God, sprinkled and perfumed with the grateful odour of his
   own expiatory sacrifice, and may thus through him be rendered
   acceptable to the Father. For this cause, the Apostle says, "By him,
   therefore, let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually,
   that is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his name." (Heb. xiii.
   15). We are indeed, by his favour "a holy priesthood," to offer up
   spiritual sacrifices; but those sacrifices are rendered "acceptable to
   God, only by Jesus Christ." (1 Pet. ii. 5.) Not only was it his
   pleasure that we should be partakers of this sacerdotal dignity, but
   likewise of the eternity attached to it, that we also might execute the
   office of the priesthood after the order of Melchizedec, which by a
   sacred oath was consecrated to immortality. For though, at the close of
   these ages of time, Christ will not any longer perform the expiatory
   part of the priesthood, yet he will forever discharge its eucharistic
   duties in our favour. These eucharistic duties we shall also execute in
   him and through him, unless, in the midst of the enjoyment of the
   benefits received by us from him, we should desire our memories no
   longer to retain the recollection, that through him we obtained those
   blessings, and through him we have been created priests to render due
   thanksgiving to God the chief Donor of all. But, since we are not able
   to offer to God, so long as we remain in this mortal body, the
   sacrifices due to him, except by the strenuous resistance which we
   offer to Satan, the world, sin, and our own flesh, and through the
   victory which we obtain over them, (both of which are royal acts,) and
   since, after this life, we shall execute the sacerdotal office, being
   elevated with him on the throne of his Father, and having all our
   enemies subdued under us, he hath therefore made us both kings and
   priests, yea "a royal priesthood" to our God, that nothing might be
   found in the typical priesthood of Melchizedec, in the enjoyment of
   which we should not equally participate.

   4. The FOURTH, and last FRUIT of the Priesthood of Christ, proposed to
   be noticed by us, is the act of bringing to God all the church of the
   faithful; which is the end and completion of the three preceding
   effects. For with this intent the covenant was contracted between God
   and men; with this intent the remission of sins, the adoption of sons,
   and the Spirit of grace were conferred on the church; for this purpose
   the new eucharistic and royal priesthood was instituted; that, being
   made priests and kings, all the covenant people might be brought to
   their God. In most expressive language the Apostle Peter ascribes this
   effect to the priesthood of Christ, in these words: "For Christ also
   hath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, THAT HE MIGHT
   BRING US TO GOD." (1 Pet. iii. 18.) The following are also the words of
   an Apostle concerning the same act of bringing them to God: "Then
   cometh the end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to God,
   even the Father." (1 Cor. xv. 24). In Isaiah's prophecy it is said,
   "Behold I and the children whom the Lord hath given me!" Let these
   words be considered as proceeding out of the mouth of Christ, when he
   is bringing his children and addressing the Father; not that they may
   be for signs and for wonders" to the people, but "a peculiar treasure
   to the Lord."

   Christ will therefore bring all his church, whom he hath redeemed to
   himself by his own blood, that they may receive, from the hands of the
   Father of infinite benignity, the heavenly inheritance which has been
   procured by his death, promised in his word, and sealed by the Holy
   Spirit, and may enjoy it forever. He will bring his priests, whom
   sprinkled with his blood, he hath sanctified unto God, that they may
   serve him forever. He will bring his kings, that they may with God
   possess the kingdom forever and ever: for in them, by the virtue of his
   Holy Spirit, he has subdued and overcome Satan the Chief, and his
   auxiliaries, the world, sin, and their own flesh, yea, and "death
   itself, the last enemy that shall be destroyed."

   Christ will bring, and God even the Father will receive. He will
   receive the church of Christ, and will command her as "the bride, the
   Lamb's wife," on her introduction into the celestial bride-chamber, to
   celebrate a perpetual feast with the Lamb, that she may enjoy the most
   complete fruition of pleasure, in the presence of the throne of his
   glory. He will receive the priests, and will clothe them with the
   comely and beautiful garments of perfect holiness, that they may
   forever and ever sing to God a new song of thanksgiving. And then he
   will receive the kings, and place them on the throne of his Majesty,
   that they may with God and the Lamb obtain the kingdom and may rule and
   reign forever.

   These are the fruits and benefits which Christ, by the administration
   of his priesthood, hath asked and obtained for us, and communicated to
   us. Their dignity is undoubtedly great, and their utility immense. For
   what could occur of a more agreeable nature to those who are "alienated
   from the life of God, and strangers to the covenants of promise,"
   (Ephes. ii. 12,) than to be received by God into the covenant of grace,
   and to be reckoned among his people? What could afford greater pleasure
   to the consciences which were oppressed with the intolerable burden of
   their sins, and fainting under the weight of the wrath of God, than the
   remission and pardon of all their transgressions? What could prove more
   acceptable to men, sons of the accursed earth, and to those who are
   devoted to hell, than to receive from God the adoption of sons, and to
   be written in heaven? What greater pleasure could those enjoy who he
   under the dominion of Satan and the tyranny of sin, than a freedom from
   such a state of most horrid and miserable servitude, and a restoration
   to true liberty? What more glorious than to be admitted into a
   participation of the Priesthood and of the Monarchy, to be consecrated
   priests and kings to God, even royal priests and priestly kings? And,
   lastly, what could be more desirable than to be brought to God, the
   Chief Good and the Fountain of all happiness, that, in a beautiful and
   glorious state, we may spend with him a whole eternity?

   This priesthood was imposed by God himself, "with whom we have to do,"
   on Christ Jesus--the Son of God and the Son of man, our first-born
   brother, formerly encompassed about with infirmities, tempted in all
   things, merciful, holy, faithful, undefiled, and separate from sinners;
   and its imposition was accompanied by a sacred oath, which it is not
   lawful to revoke. Let us, therefore, rely with assured faith on this
   priesthood of Christ, entertaining no doubt that God hath ratified and
   confirmed, is now ratifying and confirming, and will forever ratify and
   confirm all those things which have been accomplished, are now
   accomplishing, and will continue even to the consummation of this
   dispensation to be accomplished, on our account, by a High Priest taken
   from among ourselves and placed in the Divine presence, having received
   in our behalf an appointment from God, who himself chose him to that
   office.

   Since the same Christ hath by the administration of his own priesthood
   obtained a perpetual expiation and purgation of our sins, and eternal
   redemption, and hath erected a throne of grace for us in heaven, "let
   us draw near [to this throne of grace] with a true heart and in full
   assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil
   conscience," (Heb. x. 22,) "and our conscience purged from dead works,"
   (ix, 14,) assuredly concluding "that we shall obtain mercy, and find
   grace to help in time of need." (iv, 16.)

   LASTLY. Since, by the administration of this priesthood, so many and
   such excellent benefits have been obtained and prepared for us of which
   we have already received a part as "the first-fruits," and since we
   expect to reap in heaven the choicest part of these benefits, and the
   whole of them in the mass, and that most complete--what shall we render
   to our God for such a transcendent dignity? What thanks shall we offer
   to Christ who is both our High Priest and the Lamb? "We will take the
   cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord." We will offer to
   God "the calves of our lips," and will "present to him our bodies,
   souls, and spirits, a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable." (Rom.
   xii. 1.) Even while remaining in these lower regions, we will sing,
   with the four and twenty elders that stand around the throne, this
   heavenly song to the God and Father of all: "Thou art worthy, O Lord,
   to receive glory, and honour, and power. For thou hast created all
   things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created." (Rev. iv. 11.)
   To Christ our High Priest and the Lamb, we will, with the same elders,
   chant the new song, saying, "Thou art worthy to take the book, and to
   open the seals thereof: for thou wast slain, and hast redeemed us to
   God by thy blood out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and
   nation; and hast made us unto our God kings and priests: and we shall
   reign on the earth." (v, 10.) Unto both of them together we will unite
   with every creature in singing, "BLESSING, AND honour, AND GLORY, AND
   MIGHT BE TO HIM WHO SITTETH UPON THE THRONE, AND UNTO THE LAMB FOREVER
   AND EVER."-I have finished.

   After the Academic Act of his promotion to a Doctor's degree was
   completed, Arminius, according to the custom at Leyden, which still
   obtains in many Universities, briefly addressed the same audience in
   the following manner:

   Since the countenance necessary for the commencement of every
   prosperous action proceeds from God, it is proper that in him also
   every one of our actions should terminate. Since, therefore, his Divine
   clemency and benignity have hitherto regarded us in a favourable light,
   and have granted to this our act the desired success, let us render
   thanks to Him for such a great display of His benevolence, and utter
   praise to His holy name.

   "O thou Omnipotent and Merciful God, the Father of our Lord Jesus
   Christ, we give thanks to thee for thine infinite benefits conferred
   upon us miserable sinners. But we would first praise thee for having
   willed that thy Son Jesus Christ should be the victim and the price of
   redemption for our sins; that thou hast out of the whole human race
   collected for thyself a church by thy word and Holy Spirit; that thou
   hast snatched us also from the kingdom of darkness and of Satan, and
   hast translated us into the kingdom of light and of thy Son; that thou
   hast called Holland, our pleasant and delightful country, to know and
   confess thy Son and to enjoy communion with him; that thou hast
   hitherto preserved this our native land in safety against the
   machinations and assaults of a very powerful adversary; that thou hast
   instituted, in our renowned city, this university as a seminary of true
   wisdom, piety and righteousness; and that thou hast to this hour
   accompanied these scholastic exercises with thy favour. We intreat
   thee, O holy and indulgent God, that thou wouldst forever continue to
   us these benefits; and do not suffer us, by our ingratitude, to deserve
   at thy bands, to be deprived of them. But be pleased rather to increase
   them, and to confirm the work which thou hast begun. Cause us always to
   reflect with retentive minds on these things, and to utter eternal
   praises to thy most holy name on account of them, through our Lord
   Jesus Christ. Amen."

   I thank you, Doctor Francis Gomarus, and am grateful to you, most
   illustrious man and very learned promoter, for this great privilege
   with which you have invested one who is undeserving of it. I promise at
   all times to acknowledge with a grateful mind this favour, and to
   strive that you may never have just cause to repent of having conferred
   this honour upon me.

   To you also, most noble Lord Rector, and to the very honourable the
   Senate of the University, (unless I should desire to defile myself with
   the crime of an ungrateful spirit,) I owe greater thanks than I am able
   to express, for the honourable judgment which you have formed
   concerning me, and for your liberal testimony, which by no deed of mine
   have I ever deserved. But I promise and bind myself to exert my powers
   to the utmost, that I may not at any time be found to be entirely
   unworthy of it. If I thus exert myself, I know that you will accept it
   as a payment in full of all the debt of gratitude which you have a
   right to demand.

   I now address you, most noble, honourable and famous men, to all and to
   each of whom I confess myself to be greatly indebted for your continued
   and liberal benevolence towards me, which you have abundantly
   demonstrated by your wish to honour this our act with your most noble,
   honourable, famous and worthy presence. I would promise to make you a
   requital at some future period, did not the feebleness of my powers
   shrink from the magnitude of the undertaking implied in that
   expression, and did not the eminence of your stations repress the
   attempt.

   In the duty of returning thanks which I am now discharging, I must not
   omit you, most noble and studious youths: For I owe this acknowledgment
   to your partial and kind inclination to me, of which you have given a
   sufficiently exuberant declaration in your honourable appearance and
   modest demeanor while you have been present at this our act. I give my
   promise and solemn undertaking, that if an occasion hereafter offer
   itself in which I can render myself serviceable to you, I will
   endeavour in every capacity to compensate you for this your kind
   partiality. The occurrence of such an opportunity is at once the object
   of my hopes and my wishes.
     __________________________________________________________________

ORATION V

  ON RECONCILING RELIGIOUS DISSENSIONS AMONG CHRISTIANS

   Never since the first entrance of sin into the world, have there been
   any ages so happy as not to be disturbed by the occurrence of some evil
   or other; and, on the contrary, there has been no age so embittered
   with calamities, as not to have had a sweet admixture of some good, by
   the presence of the divine benevolence renewed towards mankind. The
   experience of all ages bears witness to the truth of this observation;
   and it is taught by the individual history of every nation. If, from a
   diligent consideration of these different histories and a comparison
   between them, any person should think fit to draw a parallel of the
   blessings and of the calamities which have either occurred at one and
   the same period, or which have succeeded each other, he would in
   reality be enabled to contemplate, as in a mirror of the greatest
   clearness and brilliancy, how the Benignity of God has at all times
   contended with his Just Severity, and what a conflict the Goodness of
   The Deity has always maintained with the Perversity of men. Of this a
   fair specimen is afforded to us in the passing events of our own age,
   within that part of Christendom with which we are more immediately
   acquainted. To demonstrate this, I do not deem it necessary to recount
   all the Evils which have rushed, like an overwhelming inundation, upon
   the century which has been just completed: for their infinity would
   render such an attempt difficult and almost impossible. Neither do I
   think it necessary, to enumerate, in a particular manner, the Blessings
   which those evils have been somewhat mitigated.

   To confirm this truth, it will be abundantly sufficient to mention one
   very remarkable Blessing, and one Evil of great magnitude and directly
   opposed to that blessing. This Blessing is, that the Divine clemency
   irradiates our part of the world by the illustrious light of his sacred
   truth, and enlightens it with the knowledge of true religion, or
   Christianity. The Evil opposed to it is, that either human ignorance or
   human perversity deteriorates and corrupts the clear light of this
   Divine truth, by aspersing and beclouding it with the blackest errors;
   creates separation and division among those who have devoted themselves
   exclusively to the service of religion; and severs them into parties,
   and even into shreds of parties, in direct contradiction to the nature
   and genius of Christianity, whose Author is called the "Prince of
   peace," its doctrine "the Gospel of peace," and its professors "the
   Sons of peace." The very foundation of it is an act of pacification
   concluded between God and men, and ratified by the blood of the Prince
   of peace. The precepts inculcated in each of its pages, are concerning
   peace and concord; its fruits are "righteousness, peace, and joy in the
   Holy Ghost;" and its end is peace and eternal tranquillity. But
   although the light from this torch of truth, which is diffused through
   the Christian world, affords no small refreshment to my mind; and
   although a view of that clearer light which shines among the Churches
   that profess to have been Reformed from Popery, is most exhilarating;
   yet I cannot dissemble the intense grief which I feel at my heart on
   account of that religious discord which has been festering like a
   gangrene, and pervading the whole of Christianity:

   Unhappily, its devastations have not terminated. In this unfeigned
   feeling of deep regret, I think, all those who love Christ and his
   Church, will partake with me; unless they possess hearts of greater
   hardness than Parian marble, and bowels secured from compassionate
   attacks by a rigidity stronger than that of the oak, and by defenses
   more impregnable than those of triple brass.

   This is the cause which has incited me to offer a few remarks on
   religious dissensions in the Christian world; for, according to that
   common proverb, "Whenever a man feels any pain, his hand is almost
   spontaneously moved to the part affected." This, therefore, is the
   subject which I propose to introduce to the notice of the present
   celebrated assembly, in which the province has been awarded to me, of
   delivering an oration at this Academic Festival, according to an
   established and laudable custom. I shall confine myself to three
   particulars: In the first place, I will give a dissertation on This
   Discord Itself and The Evils Which Spring From It. I will then show its
   Causes; and, lastly, its Remedies.

   The first particular includes within itself the Necessity of removing
   such a great evil; and the last prescribes the Manner in which it may
   be removed, to which the middle particular materially contributes. The
   union of the whole together explains and justifies the nature of the
   design which I have now undertaken.

   I humbly pray and intreat the God of peace, that he will, by his Spirit
   of truth and peace, be present with me while engaged in speaking; and
   that he will govern my mind and direct my tongue, that I may utter such
   things as may be pleasing to him and salutary to the Church of Christ,
   for the glory of his name and our mutual instruction.

   I likewise prefer a request to you, my very famous and accomplished
   hearers, that you will deign to grant me your favourable attention,
   while I glance at each of these particular, with much brevity, and
   discharge the office of a director to you rather than that of an
   orator, lest I trespass on your patience.

   I. Union is a great good: it is indeed the chief good and therefore the
   only one, whether we separately consider each thing of which it is
   composed, or more of them contained together by a certain social tie or
   relation between themselves. For all things together, and each thing
   separately, are what they are by that very thing by which they are one;
   and, by this union, they are preserved in what they really are. And, if
   they have need and are capable of further perfection, they are, by the
   same union, still more strengthened, increased, and perfected, until
   they attain to the utmost boundary prescribed to them by nature or by
   grace, or by God the Author of both grace and nature. Of such certainty
   is this truth, that even the blessedness of God consists in that union
   by which he is ONE and always present with himself, and having all
   things belonging to him present together with him. Nothing, therefore,
   can be more agreeable or desirable than Union, whether viewed in
   reference to single things or to the whole together; nothing can be
   more noxious and detestable than Dissension, by which all things begin
   at first to decline from their own condition, are afterwards diminished
   by degrees, and, at length, perish. But as there are differences of
   Good, so are there likewise of Union. More excellent than another is
   that good which in its own nature obtains the pre-eminence above the
   other, on account of its being more general and durable, and on account
   of its approaching more nearly to the Chief Good. In like manner that
   union is also more excellent which consists of a thing of greater
   excellence, belongs to many, is more durable and unites itself most
   intimately with the Deity. The union of true religion is, therefore,
   one of the greatest excellence.

   But as those evil things which are opposed to the good things of
   greatest excellence, are the very worst of their kind, so no discord is
   more shocking and hideous than that about religion. The truth of this
   remark is confirmed by the inward nature of this discord; and it is
   further manifested most clearly by the effects which proceed from it.

   1. We shall see its Nature (1.) in the object of discord, (2.) in the
   ready inclination for this object, which is evinced by the discordant
   partizans, (3.) in its extensive range, and (4.) its long continuance.

   (1.) The Christian Religion is the Object of this discord or
   dissension. When viewed with respect to its form, this religion
   contains the true knowledge of the true God and of Christ; and the
   right mode in which both of them may be worshipped. And when viewed
   with regard to its end, it is the only medium by which we can be bound
   and united to God and Christ, and by which on the other hand God and
   Christ can be bound and united to us. From this idea of connecting the
   parties together, the name of religion is derived, in the opinion of
   Lactantius. In the term "Religion," therefore, are contained true
   wisdom and true virtue, and the union of both with God as the Chief
   Good, in all of which is comprehended the supreme and the only
   happiness of this world and of that which is to come. And not only in
   reality, but in the estimation also of every one on whose mind a notion
   of religion has been impressed, (that is, on the whole of mankind,) men
   are distinguished from other animals, not by reason, but by a genuine
   character much more appropriate and indeed peculiar to them, and that
   is Religion, according to the authority of the same Lactantius.

   (2.) But if bounds be imposed on the desire towards any thing by such
   an opinion of its value as is preconceived in the mind, an inclination
   or propensity towards religion is deservedly entitled to the highest
   consideration, and holds the preeminence in the mind of a religious
   person. Nay, more than this, if, according to St. Bernard and to truth
   itself, "the measure to be observed in loving God, is to love him
   without measure," a propensity or inclination towards religion, (of
   which the chief and choicest part consists of love to God and Christ,)
   is itself without bounds: For it is at once illimitable and
   immeasurable. This is tantamount to the declaration of Christ, the
   Author of our religion, who said, "If any man come to me, and hate not
   his father and mother, and wife and children, and brethren and sisters,
   yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my disciple." (Luke xiv. 26.)
   This strong affection for religion answers equally to that immeasurable
   love by which any one desires the union of himself with God, that is,
   desires the greatest happiness, because he knows that Religion is the
   strongest bond and the most adhesive cement of this union. Most
   serious, therefore, is religious discord when it is engaged in disputes
   about the altar itself.

   (3.) Besides, it spreads and diffuses itself most extensively; for it
   involves within its vortex all the persons that have been initiated in
   the sacred rites of the Christian religion. No one is permitted to
   profess neutrality; nay, it is impossible for any man to remain neutral
   in the midst of religious dissension. For he who makes no advances
   towards the opposite sentiments of each of the dissidents, is induced
   thus to act from one of these four causes: (i.) He either cherishes a
   third opinion in the Christian Religion, far removed from both the
   others: (ii.) He thinks some other religion better than Christianity.
   (iii.) He places Christianity and other systems of religion on an
   equality: Or, (iv.) He entertains an equal disregard for the Christian
   system and all other modes of religion. The first of these characters
   is not neutral, but becomes a third party among the disputants. The
   second and the third dissent entirely from the Christian Religion, the
   axioms of which are, "that it is true, and that it alone is true:" for
   it is not so accommodating as Paganism, it admits of no other system to
   be its associate. Besides, the second of these characters is an Atheist
   according to the Christian Religion, one of the statutes of which, is,
   that "whosoever denieth Christ the Son, the same hath not God the
   Father." (1 John ii. 23.) Against the third party this sentence is
   pronounced:

   "He that gathereth not with me, scattereth abroad." (Matt. xii. 30.)
   The fourth is considered an Atheist by all mankind, and is deemed a
   second and adverse party in that most general kind of dissension which
   exists between true religion and its adversaries.

   (4.) Lastly. This discord is very long in its continuance and almost
   incapable of reconciliation. For these traits in it, two causes may, I
   think, be assigned, and both of them deducible from the very nature of
   religion.

   The first is, that since religion is both in reality a matter that
   belongs to the Deity, and is so accounted by every one, being subject
   to his sole pleasure and management, and exempt from the jurisdiction
   of men; and since it has been bestowed, that it may exercise authority
   as a rule for the direction of life, and for prescribing some limits to
   liberty, and not that it may be slavishly subservient to the wills of
   men, like a Lesbian rule, which may be accommodated to every condition;
   since these are some of the properties of religion, man is not
   permitted to stipulate concerning it, and scarcely any one has had the
   audacity to arrogate to himself such an assumption of authority.

   The other cause is, that the parties individually think, if they
   concede even the smallest particle of the matter of discord, such a
   concession is nearly connected with the peril of their own salvation.
   But this is the genius of all separatists, not to enter into any
   treaties of concord with their adversaries, unless they be permitted to
   have life at least, and liberty, secured to them inviolate. But every
   one thinks, that his life, (that is, his spiritual life,) and the
   liberty which is proper for that life, are included in religion and its
   exercise.

   To these a third cause may be added, which consists of the opinion,
   that each party supposes life and eternal salvation to be denied to
   them by their opponents, from this circumstance, because those
   opponents disapprove of their religion, and when it is compared with
   their own, they treat it with the utmost contempt. This injury appears
   to be the most grievous and aggravating. But every act of pacification
   has its commencement in the oblivion of all injuries, and its
   foundation in the omission of those injuries which (to an eye that is
   jaundiced with such a prejudice as that which we have just stated,)
   seem to be continued and perpetual grievances.

   When the nature and tendency of this species of discord have become
   quite apparent to worldly-minded Rulers, they have often employed it,
   or at least the semblance of it, for the purpose of involving their
   subjects in enmities, dissensions and wars, in which they had
   themselves engaged for other reasons. Having in this manner frequently
   implicated the people committed to his charge, a prince has become at
   pleasure prodigal of their property and their persons. These were
   readily sacrificed by the people to the defense of the ancient
   religion; but they were perverted by their rulers, to obtain the
   fulfillment of their desires, which they would never have procured, had
   they been deprived of such popular assistance. The magnitude of the
   dissension induces the willing parties cheerfully to make contributions
   of their property to their prince; the multitude of the Dissidents
   ensures their ability to contribute as much as may be sufficient; and
   the obstinate spirit which is indigenous to dissension, causes the
   parties never to grow weary of giving, while they retain the ability.

   We have now in some sort delineated the nature of this discord or
   dissension, and have shewn that it is most important in its bearings,
   most extensive in its range, and most durable in its continuance.

   2. Let us further see what have been, and what still are, the Effects
   of an evil of such a magnitude, in this part of the Christian world. We
   may, I think, refer the infinitude of these effects to two chief kinds.
   The first kind is derived from the force of the dissension on the Minds
   of men; and the second kind has its commencement in the operation of
   the same dissension on their Hearts and affections.

   First. From the force of this dissension on the Minds of men, arises,
   (1.) a degree of doubtful uncertainty respecting religion. When the
   people perceive that there is scarcely any article of Christian
   doctrine concerning which there are not different and even
   contradictory opinions; that one party calls that "horrid blasphemy"
   which another party has laid down as a "complete summary of the truth;"
   that those points which some professors consider the perfection of
   piety, receive from others the contumelious appellation of "cursed
   idolatry;" and that controversies of this description are objects of
   warm discussion between men of learning, respectability, experience and
   great renown. When all these things are perceived by the people, and
   when they do not observe any discrepancy in the life and manners of the
   opposite disputants, sufficiently great to induce them to believe that
   God vouchsafes assistance by "the spirit of his truth," to one of these
   parties, in preference to the other, on account of any superior
   sanctity, they begin then to indulge in the imagination, that they may
   esteem the principles of religion alike obscure and uncertain.

   (2.) If an intense desire to institute an inquiry into some subject
   shall succeed this dubious uncertainty about religion, its warmth will
   abate and become cool, as soon as serious difficulties arise in the
   search, and an utter despair of being able to discern the truth will be
   the consequence. For what simple person can hope to discover the truth,
   when he understands that a dispute exists about its very
   principles--whether they be contained in the scriptures alone, or in
   traditions not committed to writing? What hope can he entertain when he
   sees that, question often arises concerning the translation of some
   passage of scripture, which can be solved only by a knowledge of the
   Hebrew and Greek languages? How can he hope to find out the truth, when
   he remarks, that the opinions of learned men, who have written on
   religious subjects, are not unfrequently quoted in the place of
   evidence--while he is ignorant of all languages except that of the
   country in which he was born, is destitute of all other books, and
   possesses only a copy of the scriptures translated into the vernacular
   language? How can such a person be prevented from forming an opinion,
   that nothing like certainty respecting the chief doctrines of religion
   can be evident to any one, except that man who is well skilled in the
   two sacred languages, has a perfect knowledge of all traditions, has
   perused with the closest attention the writings of all the great
   Doctors of the Church, and has thoroughly instructed himself in the
   sentiments which they held respecting each single principle of
   religion?

   (3.) But what follows this despair? Either a most perverse opinion
   concerning all religion, an entire rejection of every species of it, or
   Atheism. These produce Epicurism, a still more pestilent fruit of that
   ill-fated tree. For when the mind of man is in despair about
   discovering the truth, and yet is unable to throw aside at the first
   impulse all care concerning religion and personal salvation, it is
   compelled to devise a cunning charm for appeasing conscience: (i.) The
   human mind in such a state will either conclude, that it is not only
   unnecessary for common people to understand the axioms of religion ,
   and to be well assured of what they believe; but that the attainment of
   these objects is a duty incumbent on the clergy alone, to the faith of
   whom, as of "them that must give account" to God for the salvation of
   souls, (Heb. xiii. 17,) it is quite sufficient for the people to
   signify their assent by a blind concurrence in it. The clergy also
   themselves, with a view to their own advantage, not unfrequently
   discourage all attempts, on the part of the people, to gain such a
   knowledge of religion and such an assured belief. (ii.) Or the mind in
   such circumstances will persuade itself, that all worship paid to God,
   with the good intention of a devout mind, is pleasing to him; and
   therefore under every form of religion, (provided such good intention
   be conscientiously observed,) a man may be saved, and all sects are to
   be considered as placed in a condition of equality. The men who have
   imbibed such notions as these, which point out an easy mode of
   pacifying the conscience, and one that in their opinion is neither
   troublesome nor dangerous--these men not only desert all study of
   divine things themselves, but lay folly to the charge of that person
   who institutes a labourious inquiry and search for that which they
   imagine can never be discovered, as though he purposely sought
   something on which his insanity might riot.

   But not less steep and precipitous is the descent from this state of
   despair to absolute Atheism. For since these persons despair of
   offering to the Deity the adoration of true religion, they think they
   may abstain from all acts of worship to him without incurring any
   greater harm or punishment; because God considers no worship agreeable
   to him except that which he has prescribed, and he bestows a reward on
   no other. The efficacy of this despair is increased by their religion
   which seems to be interwoven with the natural dispositions of some men,
   and which, eagerly seizing on every excuse for sin, deceives itself,
   and veils its native profaneness and want of reverence for the Deity
   under the cloak of the grievous dissensions which have been introduced
   about religion. But other two reasons may be adduced why Religious
   differences are, in the Christian world, the fruitful causes of
   Atheism. (i.) The first is, that by this battering-ram of dissensions,
   the foundations of Divine Providence, which constitute the basis of all
   Religion, experience a violent concussion. When this thought enters the
   mind, that "it appears to be the first duty of providence, (if it
   actually have an existence,) to place her dearest daughter, Religion,
   in such a luminous light, that she may stand manifest and apparent to
   the view of all who do not willingly drag their eyes out of their
   sockets." (ii.) The other is, that when men are not favoured with
   Christian prophecy, which comprises religious instruction, and are
   destitute of the exercise of Divine worship, they first almost
   imperceptibly slide into ignorance and into the complete disuse of all
   worship, and afterwards prolapse into open impiety. But it has not
   unfrequently been the case, that men have suffered themselves to be
   deprived of these blessings, sometimes by the prohibition of their own
   consciences, and sometimes by those of others. (i.) By the prohibition
   of their own consciences, when they do not think it lawful for them to
   be present at the public sermons and other religious ordinances of a
   party that is adverse to them. (ii.) By that of the consciences of
   others, when the prevailing party forbid their weaker opponents to
   assemble together as a congregation, to hear what they account most
   excellent truths, and to perform their devotions with such rites and
   ceremonies as are agreeable to themselves. In this manner, therefore,
   even conscience, when resting on the foundation of religion, becomes
   the agent of impiety, where discord reigns in a religious community.
   From Atheism, as a root, Epicurism buds forth, which dissolves all the
   ties of morality, is ruinous to it, and causes it to degenerate into
   licentiousness. All this, Epicurism effects, by previously breaking
   down the barriers of the fear of God, which alone restrain men within
   the bounds of their duty.

   Secondly. All these evils proceed from religious dissension when its
   operation is efficacious on the Mind. Most sincerely do I wish that it
   would remain there, content itself with displaying its insolence in the
   hall of the mind where discord has its proper abode, and would not
   attack the Affections of the Heart. But, vain is my wish! For so
   extensively does it pervade the heart and subdue all its affections,
   that it abuses at pleasure the slaves that act as assistants.

   1. For since all similarity in manners, studies and opinions, possesses
   very great power in conciliating love and regard; and since any want of
   resemblance in these particulars is of great potency in engendering
   hatred, it often happens that from religious dissension arise Enmities
   more deadly than that hatred which Vatinius conceived against Cicero,
   and such exasperations of heart as are utterly irreconcilable. When
   religious discord makes its appearance, even amongst men the most
   illustrious in name and of the greatest celebrity, who had been
   previously bound together and united among themselves by a thousand
   tender ties of nature and affection, they instantly renounce, one
   against another, all tokens of friendship, and burst asunder the
   strictest bands of amity. This is signified by Christ, when he says, "I
   came not to send peace on earth, but a sword. For I am come to set a
   man at variance against his father, and the daughter against her
   mother, and the daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law. And a man's
   foes shall be they of his own household." (Matt. x. 31-36.) These words
   do not indicate the end and purpose of the coming of Christ, but an
   event which would succeed his coming; because he was then about to
   introduce into the world a religion which differed greatly from that
   which was publicly established, and concerning which many dissensions
   would afterwards arise, through the vicious corruption of mankind.

   This dissimilarity was the origin of the rancor of the Jews against the
   Samaritans, which displayed itself in not allowing themselves to derive
   any benefit from the services of the Samaritans, even in matters that
   were necessary for their own convenience. It was the existence of this
   feeling which caused the woman of Samaria to wonder, concerning Jesus,
   "how he, who was a Jew, could ask drink of her, a Samaritan woman."
   (John iv. 9.) Indeed, it is the utmost stretch of hatred, to be
   unwilling to derive any advantage from another person that is an enemy.

   2. Enmities and dissensions of the heart and affections branch out and
   become Schisms, factions and secessions into different parties. For as
   love is an affection of union, so is hatred an affection of separation.
   Thus synagogues are erected, consecrated and thronged with people, in
   opposition to other synagogues, churches against churches, and alters
   against altars, when neither party wishes to have intercourse with the
   other. This also is the reason why we frequently hear expressions,
   entirely similar to those which were clamorously echoed through the
   assembled multitude of the Children of Israel when they were separating
   into parties, "To your tents, O Israel! for our adversaries have no
   portion in God, nor any inheritance in his Son Christ Jesus." (1 Kings
   xii. 16.) For both factions equally appropriate to themselves the
   renowned name of "the true Israel," which they severally deny to their
   adversaries, in such a peremptory manner as might induce one to imagine
   each of them exclusively endowed with a plenary power of passing
   judgment upon the other, and as though it had been previously
   concluded, that the name of ISRAEL, by which God accosts in a most
   gracious manner the whole of his Church, cannot encircle within its
   embrace those who differ in any point from the rest of their brethren.

   3. But the irritation of inflamed hearts does not prescribe a boundary
   to itself in schism alone. For if it happen, that one party considers
   itself the more powerful, it will not be afraid of instituting
   Persecutions against the party opposed to it, and of attempting its
   entire extermination. In effecting this, it spares no injury, which
   either human ingenuity can devise, the most notable fury can dictate,
   or even the office of the infernal regions can supply. Rage is excited
   and cruelty exercised against the reputation, the property, and the
   persons of the living; against the ashes, the sepulchers, and the
   memory of the dead; and against the souls both of the living and the
   dead. Those who differ from the stronger party are attacked with all
   kinds of weapons; with cruel mockings, calumnies, execrations, curses,
   excommunications, anathemas, degrading and scandalous libels, prisons
   and instruments of torture. They are banished to distant or uninhabited
   islands, condemned to the mines, prohibited from having any
   communication with their fellow-creatures by land or sea, and excluded
   from a sight of either heaven or earth. They are tormented by water,
   fire and the sword, on crosses and stakes, on wheels of torture and
   gibbets, and by the claws of wild beasts, without any measure, bounds
   or end, until the party thus oppressed have been destroyed, or have
   submitted themselves to the pleasure of the more powerful, by rejecting
   with abjurations the sentiments which they formerly held, and by
   embracing with apparent devotion those of which they had previously
   disapproved; that is, by destroying themselves through the hypocritical
   profession which had been extolled from them by violence. Call to mind
   how the Heathens persecuted the Christians; and the persecuting conduct
   of the Aryans against the orthodox, of the worshippers of images
   against the destroyers of images, and vice versa. That we may wander to
   no great distance let us look at what has occurred within the period of
   our recollection and that of our fathers, in Spain, Portugal, France,
   England, and the Low Countries; and we shall confess with tears, that
   these remarks are lamentably too true.

   4. But if it happen that the contending parties are nearly equal in
   power, or that one of them has been long oppressed, wearied out by
   persecutions, and inflamed with a desire for liberty, after having had
   their patience converted into fury, (as it is called,) or rather into
   just indignation, and if the pressed party assume courage, summon all
   its strength, and collect its forces, then most mighty wars arise,
   grievances are repeated, after a flourish of trumpets the herald's
   hostile spear is sent forth in defiance, war is proclaimed, the
   opposing armies charge each other, and the struggle is conducted in a
   most bloody and barbarous manner. Both the belligerents observe a
   profound silence about entering into negotiations for peace, lest that
   party which first suggests such a course, should, from that very
   circumstance, create a prejudice against its own cause and make it
   appear the weaker of the two and the more unjust. Nay, the strife is
   carried on with such willful obstinacy, that he can scarcely be endured
   who for a moment suspends their mutual animosities by a mention of
   peace, unless he have placed a halter around his neck, and be prepared
   to be suspended by it on a gibbet, in case his discourse on this topic
   happens to displease. For such a lover of peace would be stigmatized as
   a deserter from the common cause, and considered guilty of heresy, a
   favourer of heretics, an apostate and a traitor.

   Indeed, all these Enmities, Schisms, Persecutions and Wars, are
   commenced, carried on, and conducted with the greater animosity, on
   account of every one considering his adversary as the most infectious
   and pestilent fellow in the whole Christian world, a public incendiary,
   a murderer of souls, an enemy of God, and a servant of the devil--as a
   person who deserves to be suddenly smitten and consumed by fire
   descending from heaven--and as one, whom it is not only lawful to hate,
   to curse and to murder without incurring any guilt, but whom it is also
   highly proper to treat in that manner, and to be entitled to no slight
   commendation for such a service, because no other work appears in his
   eyes to be more acceptable to God, of greater utility in the salvation
   of man, more odious to Satan, or more pernicious to his kingdom. Such a
   sanguinary zealot professes to be invited, instigated and constrained
   to deeds like these, by a zeal for the house of God, for the salvation
   of men, and for the divine glory. This conduct of violent partizans is
   what was predicted by the Judge and the Master of our religion: "When
   they shall persecute you and kill you for my sake, they will think that
   they do God service." (John xvi. 2.) When the very conscience,
   therefore, arouses, assists and defends the affections, no obstacle can
   offer a successful resistance to their impetuosity. Thus we see, that
   religion itself, through the vicious corruption of men, has been made a
   cause of dissension, and has become the field in which they may
   perpetually exercise themselves in cruel and bloody contests.

   If, in addition to these things, some individual arrogate to himself,
   and, with the consent of a great multitude, usurp authority to
   prescribe laws with respect to religion, to strike with the thunderbolt
   of excommunication whomsoever he pleases, to dethrone kings, to absolve
   subjects from their oaths of allegiance and fidelity, to arm them
   against their lawful rulers, to transfer the right over the dominions
   of one prince to others who are his sworn confederates, or to such as
   are prepared to seize upon them in the first instance, to pardon crimes
   however great their enormity may be, and whether already perpetrated or
   to be hereafter committed, and to canonize ruffians and assassins--the
   mere nod of such a man as is here described, must be instantly obeyed
   with blind submission, as if it were the command of God. Blessed God!
   what a quantity of most inflammable matter is thus thrown upon the fire
   of enmities, persecutions and wars. What an Iliad of disasters is thus
   introduced into the Christian world! It is, therefore, not without just
   reason that a man may exclaim, "Is it possible, that Religion can have
   persuaded men to introduce this great mass of evils?"

   But all the ills which we have enumerated do not only proceed from real
   dissensions, in which some fundamental truth is the subject of
   discussion, but also from those which are imaginary, when things affect
   the mind not as they are in reality, but according to their
   appearances. I call these imaginary dissensions. (i.) Either, because
   they exist among parties that have only a fabulous religion, which is
   at as great a distance from the true one, as the heaven is distant from
   the earth, or as the followers of such a phantom are from God himself.
   Differences of this description are found among the Mahomedans, some
   parties of whom, (as the Turks,) follow the interpretation of Omar;
   while others, (as the Persians,) are proselytes to the commentaries of
   Ali. (ii.) Or, because the discordant parties believe these imaginary
   differences to be in the substance of the true doctrine, when they have
   it in no existence whatever. Of such a difference Victor, the Bishop of
   Rome, afforded an instance, when he wished to excommunicate all the
   Eastern Churches, because they dissented from him in the proper time of
   celebrating the Christian festival of Easter.

   But, to close this part of my discourse, the very summit and conclusion
   of all the evils which arise from religious discord, is, the
   destruction of that very religion about which all the controversy has
   been raised. Indeed, religion experiences almost the same fate, as the
   young lady mentioned by Plutarch, who was addressed by a number of
   suitors; and when each of them found that she could not become entirely
   his own, they divided her body into parts, and thus not one of them
   obtained possession of her whole person. This is the nature of discord,
   to disperse and destroy matters of the greatest consequence. Of this a
   very mournful example is exhibited to us in certain extensive dominions
   and large kingdoms, the inhabitants of which were formerly among the
   most flourishing professors of the Christian Religion; but the present
   inhabitants of those countries have unchristianized themselves by
   embracing Mahomedanism--a system which derived its origin, and had its
   chief means of increase, from the dissensions which arose between the
   Jews and the Christians, and from the disputes into which the Orthodox
   entered with the Sabellians, the Aryans, the Nestorians, the
   Eutychians, and with the Monothelites.

   II. Let us proceed to contemplate the Causes of this Dissention.
   Philosophers generally divide causes, into those which directly and of
   themselves produce an effect, and into those which indirectly and by
   accident contribute to the same purpose. The consideration of each of
   these classes will facilitate our present inquiries.

   1. The accidental cause of this dissension is (1.) the very nature of
   the Christian religion, which not only transcends the human mind and
   its affections or passions, but appears to be altogether contrary to
   both it and to them. (i.) For the Christian Religion has its foundation
   in the Cross of Christ; and it holds forth this humbling truth, "JESUS
   THE CRUCIFIED, IS THE saviour OF THE WORLD," as an axiom most worthy of
   all acceptation. For this reason also, the word of which this religion
   is composed, is termed "the doctrine of the cross." (1 Cor. i. 18.) But
   what can appear to the mind more absurd or foolish, than for a
   crucified and dead person to be accounted the saviour of the world, and
   for men to believe that salvation centers in the cross? On this account
   the Apostle declares in the same passage, that the doctrine of the
   cross, [or, the preaching of Christ Crucified,] is unto the Jews a
   stumbling-block and unto the Greeks foolishness. (ii.) What is more
   opposed to the human affections than "for a man to hate and deny
   himself, to despise the world and the things that are in the world, and
   to mortify the flesh with the affections and lusts?" Yet this is
   another axiom of the Christian Religion, to which he who does not give
   a cheerful assent in mind, in will and in deed, is excluded from the
   discipleship of Christ Jesus. This indispensable requisite is the cause
   why he who is alienated in mind from the Christian Religion, does not
   yield a ready compliance with these its demands; and why he who has
   enrolled his name with Christ, and who is too weak and pusillanimous to
   inflict every species of violence on his nature, invents certain
   fictions, by which he attempts to soften and mitigate a sentence, the
   exact fulfillment of which fills him with horror. From these
   circumstances, after men have turned aside from purity of doctrine,
   dissensions are excited against religion and its firm and constant
   professors.

   (2.) In the scriptures, as in the only authentic document, the
   Christian Religion is at present registered and sealed; yet even they
   are seized upon as an occasion of error and dissension, when, as the
   Apostle Peter says, "the unlearned and unstable wrest them unto their
   own destruction," because they contain "some things hard to be
   understood." (2 Pet. iii. 16.) The figurative expressions and ambiguous
   sentences, which occur in certain parts of the scriptures, are
   undesignedly forced to conduce to the adulteration of the truth among
   those persons, "who have not their senses exercised" in them.

   2. But omitting any further notice of these matters, let us take into
   our consideration the proper causes of this dissension: (1.) In the
   front of these, Satan appears, that most bitter enemy of truth and
   peace, and the most wily disseminator of falsehood and dissension, who
   acts as leader of the hostile band. Envying the glory of God and the
   salvation of man, and attentively looking out on all occasions, he
   marks every movement; and whenever an opportunity occurs, during the
   Lord's seed time, he sows the tares of heresies and schisms among the
   wheat. From such a malignant and surreptitious mode of sowing while men
   are sleeping, (Matt. xiii. 23,) he often obtains a most abundant
   harvest. (2.) Man himself follows next in this destructive train, and
   is easily induced to perform any service for Satan, however pernicious
   its operation may prove to his own destruction; and that most subtle
   enemy, the serpent, finds in man several instruments most appropriately
   fitted for the completion of his purposes.

   First. The mind of man is the first in subserviency to Satan, both with
   regard to its blindness and its vanity. First. The Blindness of the
   mind is of two kinds, the one a native blindness, the other accidental.
   The former of these grows up with us even from the birth: our very
   origin is tainted with the infection of the primitive offense of the
   Old Adam, who turned away from God the Great Source of all his light.
   This blindness has so fascinated our eyes, as to make us appear like
   owls that become dim-sighted when the light of truth is seen. Yet this
   truth is not hidden in a deep well; but though it is placed in the
   heavens, we cannot perceive it, even when its beams are clearly shining
   upon us from above. The latter is an accidental and acquired blindness,
   which man has chosen for himself to obscure the few beams of light
   which remain him. "The God of this world hath blinded the minds of them
   which believe not; lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ
   should shine unto them." (2 Cor. iv. 4.) God himself, the just punisher
   of those who hate the truth, has inflicted on them this blindness, by
   giving efficacy to error. This is the cause why the veil that remains
   upon the mind, operates as a preventive and obstructs the view of the
   gospel; (2 Cor. 3,) and why he on whom the truth has shone in vain,
   "believes a lie." (2 Thess. ii. 11.) But assent to a falsehood is a
   dissent and separation from those who are the assertors of truth.
   Secondly. The vanity of the mind succeeds its blindness, and is prone
   to turn aside from the path of true religion, in which no one can
   continue to walk except by a firm and invariable purpose of heart. This
   vanity is also inclined to invent to itself such a Deity as may be most
   agreeable to its own vain nature, and to fabricate a mode of worship
   that may be thought to please that fictitious Deity. Each of these ways
   constitutes a departure from the unity of true religion, on deserting
   which men rush heedlessly into dissensions.

   Secondly. But the affections of the mind are, of all others, the most
   faithful and trusty in the assistance which they afford to Satan, and
   conduct themselves like abject slaves devoted to his service; although
   it must be acknowledged that they are frequently brought thus to act,
   under a false conception that they are by such deeds promoting their
   own welfare and rendering good service to God himself. Love and Hatred,
   the two chief affections, and the fruitful parents and instigators of
   all the rest, occupy the first, second, third, and indeed all the
   places, in this slavish employment. Each of them is of a three-fold
   character, that nothing might be wanting which could contribute to the
   perfection of their number.

   The Former of them consists of the love of glory, of riches, and of
   pleasures, which the disciple whom Jesus loved, thus designates, "the
   lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life." (1
   John ii. 16.) The Latter consists of hatred to the truth, to peace, and
   to the professors of the truth.

   (i.) Pride, then, that most prolific mother of dissensions in religion,
   produces its fetid offspring in three different ways: For, First,
   either it "exalteth itself against the knowledge of God," (2 Cor. x.
   5,) and does not suffer itself to be brought into captivity by the
   truth to obey God, being impatient of the yoke which is imposed by
   Christ, though it is both easy and light. Pride says in reality, "Let
   us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us."
   (Psalm ii. 3.) From this baneful source arose the sedition of Korah,
   Dathan, and Abiram, who arrogantly claimed for themselves a share in
   the priesthood, which God had given exclusively to Aaron. (Num. 16.)
   Or, Secondly, it loveth to have the pre-eminence in the Church of God,
   and "to have dominion over another's faith;" the very crime of which
   St. John accuses Diotrephes, when he complains that "neither doth he
   himself receive the brethren, and forbiddeth them that would, and
   casteth them out of the Church." (3 John 9, 10.) Or, Lastly, having
   usurped an impotent sovereignty over the souls of men by appointing and
   altering at its pleasure the laws concerning Religion, and over the
   bodies of men by employing menaces and force to bring into subjection
   to it the consciences of men, it compels those churches which cannot
   with a safe conscience bear this most iniquitous tyranny, to depart
   from the rest and to assume to themselves the management of their own
   affairs. The Greek Church declared itself to be influenced by this
   cause, in refusing to hold communion with the Latin Church, because the
   Roman Pontiff had, in opposition to all right and law, and in defiance
   of the rule of Christ and of the decrees of the Fathers, "arrogated to
   himself a plenitude of power." From the same fountain has flowed that
   immense schism which in this age distracts and divides all Europe. This
   has been ably manifested to the whole world by the just complaints and
   allegations of Protestant States and Protestant Princes.

   But envy, anger, and an eager desire to know all things, are other
   three darts, which Pride hurls against concord in religion. For, first,
   if any one excels his fellows in the knowledge of divine things, and in
   holiness of life, and if by these means he advances in favour and
   authority with the people, pride immediately injects envy into the
   minds of some persons, which contaminates all that is fair and lovely;
   asperses and defiles whatever is pure; obscures, by vile calumnies,
   either his course of life or the doctrines which he professes; puts a
   wrong construction, by means of a malevolent interpretation, on what
   was well intended and correctly expressed by him; commences disputes
   with him who is thus high in public estimation; and endeavours to lay
   the foundations of its own praise on the mass of ignominy which it
   heaps upon his name and reputation. If by such actions as these it
   cannot obtain for itself a situation equal to its desires, it then
   invents new dogmas and draws away the people after it; that it may
   enjoy such a dignity, among some individuals who have separated from
   the rest of the body, which it was impossible for it to obtain from the
   whole while they lived together in concord and harmony. Secondly. Pride
   is also the parent of anger, which may stimulate any one to revenge, if
   he think himself injured even in the slightest degree by a professor of
   the truth. Such a person reckons scarcely any injury better suited to
   his purpose or more pernicious to the affairs of his adversary, than to
   speak contumeliously and in disparagement of his sentiments, and
   publicly to proclaim him a Heretic--than which no term can be more
   opprobrious or an object of greater hatred among mortals. Because, as
   this crime does not consist of deeds, but of sentiments, the aspersions
   cast upon them cannot be so completely washed away as to leave no
   stains adhering to them, or as to create a possibility at least for the
   calumniator to remove from himself by some evasive subterfuge the
   infamy which attaches itself to him who is an utterer of slanders. The
   third weapon which pride employs in this warfare, is a passionate
   desire to explore and know all things. This passion leaves no subject
   untouched, that its learning may be displayed to advantage; and, (not
   to lose the reward of its labour,) it obtrusively palms upon others as
   things necessary to be known, those matters which, by means of great
   exertion, it seems to have drawn out from behind the darkness of
   ignorance, and accompanies all its remarks by great boldness of
   assertion. From such a disposition and conduct as this, offenses. and
   schisms must arise in the Church.

   (ii.) Avarice, likewise, or, the love of money, which is termed by the
   Apostle, "the root of all evil," (1 Tim. vi. 10,) brings its hostile
   standard into this embattled field. For, since the doctrine of truth is
   not a source of profit, when those who have faithfully taught it are
   succeeded by unbelieving teachers, "who are ravening wolves, and
   suppose gain to be godliness," the latter effect a great change in it,
   (1.) either by "binding heavy burdens, and grievous to be borne, and
   laying them on the shoulders of the disciples," (Matt. xxiii. 4,) for
   whose redemption votive offerings may be daily made; (2.) by inventing
   profitable plans for expiating sins; or, lastly, by preaching, in soft
   and complimentary language, such things as are agreeable to the ears of
   the people, for the purpose of gaining their favour, which, according
   to the expression of the Apostle, is a "corrupting of the word of God,"
   or making a gain of it. (2 Cor. ii. 17.) From these causes dissensions
   have often arisen; (1.) either when the faithful teachers that are in
   the church, or those whom God raises up for the salvation of his
   people, marshal themselves in opposition to the doctrine which is
   prepared for the sake of profit; or, (2.) when the people themselves,
   growing weary of impositions and rapine, become seceders from these
   pastors, by uniting themselves with such as are really better, or by
   receiving those as their substitutes who are in their estimation
   better. This was the torch of dissension between the Pharisees and
   Christ, who opposed their avarice and came to loose all those grievous
   burdens. This was also the primary consideration by which Luther was
   excited to obstruct the sale of Popish indulgencies; and from that
   small beginning, he gradually proceeded to reforms of greater
   importance.

   (iii.) Nor only that Pleasure or "lust of the flesh," which specially
   comes under this denomination, and which denotes a feeling or
   disposition for carnal things, takes its part in the performance of
   this tragedy, but that also which in a general sense contains a desire
   to commit sin without any remorse of conscience: and both these kinds
   of pleasure most assiduously employ themselves in collecting
   inflammable materials for augmenting the flame of discord in religion.

   For this passion or affection, having had some experience in the
   important "doctrine of the cross," desires as the very summit of all
   its wishes, both to riot, while here, in the pleasures of
   voluptuousness, and yet to cherish some hopes of obtaining the
   happiness of heaven. With two such incompatible objects in view this
   passion chooses teachers for itself, who may in an easy manner "place
   under the arm-holes of their disciples, pillows sewed and filled with
   soft feathers," (Ezek. xiii. 18,) on which they may recline themselves
   and take sweet repose, although their sins, like sharply pointed
   thorns, continue to sting and molest them in every direction. They
   flatter them with the idea of easily obtaining pardon, provided they
   purchase the favour of the Deity, by means of certain exercises
   apparently of some importance, but possessing in reality no consequence
   whatever, and by means of great donations with which they may fill his
   sanctuary. This is the complaint of the Apostle, who, when writing to
   Timothy, says, "For the time will come when they will not endure sound
   doctrine; but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves
   teachers, having itching ears; and they shall turn away their ears from
   the truth, and shall be turned unto fables." To this is subjoined an
   admonition, that Timothy should watch and discharge with fidelity the
   duties of his ministry. (2 Tim. iv. 3-5). According to this quotation,
   a difference must of necessity exist between Timothy and those
   teachers.

   But these three capital vices are serviceable to Satan, their author,
   in another way, and contribute under his direction to introduce changes
   in religion, and, consequently, to excite discord among Christians. In
   both sacred and profane history, egregious examples are recorded of
   princes and private men, who, being instigated by such a desire of
   power as partook at once of ambition and avarice, have invented new
   modes of religion, and accommodated them to the capacities, the wishes,
   and the opinions of their people; by means of which they might either
   restrain their own subjects within the bounds of their duty, or might
   subdue to their way the people that were under the rule of other
   princes. Ambition and avarice suggest to such aspiring persons the
   desire of inventing those modes of religious worship; while an itching
   for novelty, a wish to enjoy their pleasures, and the obvious agreement
   of the new doctrine with their preconceived opinions, influence the
   people to embrace the modish religion. With these intentions, and under
   the impulse of these views, Jeroboam was the first author of a change
   of religion in the Israelitish Church. He built altars in Dan and
   Bethel, and made golden calves, that he might prevent the people from
   proceeding at stated periods to Jerusalem, for the purpose of offering
   sacrifice, according to the command of God, and from returning to the
   house of David, from which they had rent themselves. The same reasons
   also induced Mahomet to invent a new religion. By his frequent
   intercourse with Jews and Christian, he had learned from both parties
   those things which were most agreeable to them; he therefore adopted
   the very crafty counsel of Sergius, the monk, and devised a new mode of
   religion, which was gratifying to the human senses, and which, as it
   was digested in his Alcoran, he persuaded many people to embrace. The
   few individuals with whom he was able to prevail, were the foundation
   from which arose the immense Ottoman empire, and those extensive
   dominions which are to the present time in possession of the Turks.

   2. We have now seen in what manner the love of glory, of riches, and
   pleasure, performs its several parts in this theater of religious
   dissensions. Let Hatred next appear and exhibit to us its actions,
   which, from the very nature of the cause, have a proper and direct
   tendency to excite discord.

   (1.) The first of its actors that appears upon the stage, is a hatred
   of the truth, and of true doctrine. This species of hatred is
   conceived, partly from an anticipated notion of the mind, which, since
   it cannot be reconciled to the doctrine of truth, and yet is with
   difficulty drawn away from it, excites hatred against a sentiment that
   is opposed to itself. It is also partly conceived, because the true
   doctrine becomes the accuser of man, forbidding those things which are
   the objects of his desires, and commanding those things which he is
   most reluctant to perform. While it urges its precepts so rigidly, that
   every one who does not seriously regulate and conform his life to the
   conditions which they contain, is excluded from all hope of salvation.

   (2.) The next in order, is the hatred of peace and concord. For there
   are men of a certain description who cannot exist without having an
   enemy, which Trogus Pompeius declares to have been a trait in the
   character of the ancient Spaniards. To such persons concord or amity is
   so offensive, that, out of pure hatred to it, they willingly expose
   themselves to the enmity of others. If such characters happen to obtain
   a station of some honour in the Church, it is amazing what scruples and
   difficulties they will not raise, what intricate sophisms they will not
   frame and contrive, and what accusations they will not institute, that
   they may have an opportunity of raising a contest about the articles of
   religion, from which proceed private enmity and rancor that can never
   be appeased, and dissensions of a more deadly kind than the greatest of
   those which relate to the present life.

   (3.) The last which comes forward, is a hatred against the professors
   of the true doctrine, from which the descent is very rapid downwards to
   a dissent from that doctrine which those good men profess; because it
   is the anxious study of every one that hates another, not to have
   anything in common with his adversary. Of this the Arabians afford an
   example. Out of hatred to Heraclius Csar, and to the stipendiary Greek
   and Latin troops who served under him, they, who had long before
   departed from them in will and affection, effected a still more serious
   separation from them in religion; for, although they had previously
   been professors of Christianity, from that period they embraced the
   doctrines of the Alcoran and became followers of Mahomet.

   But the professors of the true doctrine incur this species of hatred,
   either through some fault of their own, or through the pure malice of
   men. (i.) They incur this hatred by their own fault, if they do not
   administer the doctrine of the truth, with that prudence and gentleness
   which are appropriate to it; if they appear to have a greater regard
   for their own advantage, than for the advancement of religion, and,
   lastly, if their manner of life is in opposition to the doctrine. From
   all these circumstances a bad opinion is entertained of them, as though
   they scarcely believed the principles which they inculcate. (ii.) This
   hatred is also incurred by the fault of another, because the delicate
   and lascivious hearts of men cannot bear to have their ulcers sprinkled
   and purified by the sharp salt of truth, and because they with
   difficulty admit any censors on their life and manners. With a
   knowledge of this trait of the human heart, the Apostle inquires, "Am I
   therefore become your enemy, because I tell you the truth ," (Gal. iv.
   16.) For truth is almost invariably productive of hatred, while an
   obsequious complaisance obtains friends as its reward.

   3. The preceding appear to be the procuring causes of dissensions in
   religion; and as long as their efficacy endures, they tend to
   perpetuate these dissensions. There are other causes that we may justly
   class among those which perpetuate discord when once it has arisen, and
   which prevent the restoration of peace and unity.

   (1.) Among these perpetuating and preventing causes, the first place is
   claimed for the various prejudices by which the minds of the Dissidents
   are occupied, concerning our adversaries and their opinions, concerning
   our parents and ancestors, and the Church to which we belong, and,
   lastly, concerning ourselves and our teachers.

   (i.) The prejudice against our adversaries is, not that we think them
   under the influence of Error, but under that of pure malice, and
   because their minds have indulged their humour in thus dissenting. This
   cuts off all hope of leading them to adopt correct sentiments, and
   despair refuses to make the attempt. (ii.) The prejudice against the
   opinions of our adversary is, that we condemn them ourselves not only
   for being false, but for having been already condemned by the public
   judgment of the Church; we therefore consider them unworthy of being
   again brought into controversy, and subjected anew to examination.
   (iii.) But the preconceived opinion which we have formed concerning our
   parents and ancestors, is also a preventive of reconciliation, both
   because we account them to have been possessed of such a great share of
   wisdom and piety, as rendered it improbable that they could ever have
   been guilty of error; and because we conceive favourable hopes of their
   salvation, which is very properly an object of our most earnest wishes
   in their behalf. But these hopes we seem to call in question, if, in an
   opinion opposed to theirs, we acknowledge any portion of the truth
   appertaining to salvation, of which they have either been ignorant or
   have disapproved. It is on this principle that parents leave their
   posterity heirs as of their property so also of their opinions and
   dissensions. (iv.) Besides, the splendour of the Church, to which we
   have bound ourselves by an oath, dazzles our eyes in such a manner that
   we cannot suffer any persuasion whatever to induce us to believe the
   possibility, in former times or at present, of that church having
   deviated in any point from the right way. (v.) Lastly. Our thoughts and
   sentiments concerning ourselves and our teachers are so exalted, that
   our minds can scarcely conceive it possible either for them to have
   been ignorant, or not to have had a sufficiently clear perception of
   things, or for us to err in judgment when we approve of their opinions.
   So prone is the human understanding to exempt from all suspicion of
   error itself and those whom it loves and esteems!

   (2.) It is no wonder if these prejudices produce a pertinacity in
   eagerly defending a proposition once laid down, which is a most
   powerful impediment to reconciliation.

   Two kinds of fear render this pertinacity the more obstinate:

   (i.) One is a fear of that disgrace which, we foolishly think, will be
   incurred if we acknowledge ourselves to have been at all in error.
   (ii.) The other is a fear which causes us to think, that the whole
   doctrine is exposed to the utmost peril, if we discover it even in one
   point to be erroneous.

   (3.) In addition to these, the mode of action commonly adopted both
   towards an adversary and his opinion, is no small obstacle to
   reconciliation, although that mode may seem to have been chosen for
   conciliatory purposes.

   (i.) An adversary is treated in a perverse manner, when he is
   overwhelmed by curses and reproaches, assailed with detractions and
   calumnies, and when he is menaced with threats of violence. If he
   despises all these things, which is not an uncommon occurrence when
   "the testimony of his conscience" is in opposition to them, (2 Cor. i.
   19,) they produce no effect whatever. But if his spirit broods over
   them, his mind becomes disturbed, and, like one stricken by the Furies,
   he is driven to madness, and is thus much worse qualified than before
   to acknowledge his error. In both these ways he is confirmed rather the
   more in his own opinion; either because he perceives, that those who
   use arms of this kind openly betray the weakness as well as the
   injustice of their cause; or, because he draws this conclusion in his
   own mind, that it is not very probable that those persons are
   instructed by the Spirit of truth, who adopt such a course of conduct.

   (ii.) But contention is rashly instituted against the opinion of an
   adversary, first, when it is not proposed according to the mind and
   intention of him who is the assertor; Secondly, when it is discussed
   beyond all due bounds, and its deformity is unseasonably exaggerated;
   and, lastly, when its refutation is attempted by arguments ill
   calculated to produce that effect.

   The first occurs when we do not attend to the words of an adversary,
   with a becoming tranquillity of mind and suitable patience; but
   immediately and at the mention of the first word, we are accustomed to
   guess at his meaning. The second arises from the circumstance of no one
   wishing it to appear as if he had begun to contend about a thing of
   trifling importance. The last proceeds from ignorance or from too great
   impetuosity, which, on being precipitously impelled into fury, augments
   its mischievous capabilities. It then seizes upon anything for a
   weapon, and hurls it against the adversary. When the first mode is
   adopted, the person whose meaning is misrepresented, thinks that an
   opinion, not his own, has been calumniously attributed to him. The
   second course, according to his judgment, has been pursued for the
   purpose of affixing an envious mark upon his opinion, and upon the
   dignity which it has acquired. When the last is put in practice, be
   considers his opinion to be incapable of refutation, because he
   observes that it remains uninjured amidst all the arguments which have
   been directed against it. All and each of these add fuel to the flame
   of dissensions, and render the blazing fire inextinguishable.

   III. We have now considered the Nature, the Effects and the Causes of
   religious dissension. It remains for us to inquire into the Remedies
   for such a great evil. While I attempt this in a brief manner, I beg
   that you will favour me with that degree of attention which you have
   already manifested. The professors of medicine describe the nature of
   all remedies thus, "they are never used without some effect." For if
   they be true remedies, they must prove beneficial; and, if they do not
   profit, they prove hurtful. This latter circumstance reminds me, that I
   ought first to remove certain corrupt remedies which have been devised
   by some persons and occasionally employed.

   1. The first of these false remedies which obtrudes itself, is the
   fable of the sufficiency of implicit faith, by which people are called
   upon, without any knowledge of the matter, to believe that which is an
   object of belief with the Church and the Prelates. But the Scripture
   places righteousness "in the faith of the heart," and salvation "in the
   confession of the mouth;" (Rom. x. 10,) and says, "The just shall live
   by his faith," (Heb. ii. 4,) and "I believe and therefore have spoken."
   (2 Cor. iv. 13.) This monstrous absurdity is, therefore, exploded by
   the scripture. Not only does this fable take away all cause of
   religious dissension, but it also destroys religion itself, which, when
   it is destitute of Knowledge and Faith, can have no existence.

   2. The next figment is nearly allied to this; it concludes, that every
   one may be saved in his own religion. But while this remedy professes
   to cure one evil, it produces another much more hurtful and of greater
   magnitude; and that is, the certain destruction of those who are held
   in bondage by this error. Because this opinion renders the error
   incurable; since no one will give himself any trouble to lay it aside
   or to correct it. This was Mahomet's devise, for the purpose of
   establishing his Alcoran free from all liability of its becoming an
   object of dispute. The same doctrine obtained in Paganism, where the
   worship of demons flourished, as is evident from the title on a certain
   altar among the Athenians, the high stewards of Pagan wisdom. That
   altar bore the following inscription, "To The Gods of Asia, Europe, and
   Africa; To The Unknown and Foreign Gods:" which was after the manner of
   the Romans, at that period, "the masters of the world," who were
   accustomed to invoke the tutelary deities of an enemy's city before
   they commenced hostilities against it. In this manner has Satan exerted
   himself, lest his "kingdom, being divided against itself should fall."

   3. The third false remedy is a prohibition of all controversies
   respecting religion, which lays down the most stupid ignorance for a
   foundation, and raises upon it the superstructure of religious concord:
   In Russia, where such an ordinance is in operation, this is obvious to
   every one that contemplates its effects. Yet it is hurtful, whether it
   be true religion that flourishes, or it be false. In the first case, on
   account of the inconstancy of the human mind; and in the second case,
   because it stamps perpetuity on error, unless the preceding fiction
   concerning the equality of all religions meet with approval, for on
   that foundation, Mahomet raised this prohibition against religious
   controversies.

   4. Next to this in absurdity is the advice, not to explain the sacred
   Scriptures, but only to read them: which is not only pernicious, on
   account of the omission of their particular application, and repugnant
   to the usage both of the ancient Jewish Church and of the primitive
   Church of Christ; but it is also of no avail in the cure of the evil,
   since any one might, by reading, discover the meaning for himself,
   according to his own fancy; and that reading which is instituted at the
   will of the reader, would act the part of an explanation, on account of
   the parallelism of similar and dissimilar passages.

   But the Popish Church exhibits to us Three Remedies.

   First, that, for the sake of certainty, we mall have recourse to the
   Church Universal. However, since the whole of this church cannot meet
   together, the court of Rome has appointed in its place a representative
   assembly, consisting of the Pope, the Cardinals, the Bishops, and the
   rest of the prelates who are devoted to the Roman See, and subject to
   the Pontiff. But, in addition to this, because it believes that it is
   possible for all the Cardinals, Bishops and Prelates to err, even when
   united together in one body, and because it considers the Pope alone to
   be placed beyond the possibility of error, it declares that we must
   apply to him for the sake of obtaining a decisive judgment concerning
   Religion. This remedy is not only vain and inefficient, but it is far
   more difficult to induce the rest of the Christian world to adopt it
   than any controverted article in the whole circle of religion: And
   since the Papists endeavour to prove this point from the scriptures, by
   that very circumstance they declare that the scriptures are the only
   sanctuary to which we can repair for religious information.

   Secondly. Their next remedy is proposed, if I may, be allowed the
   expression, merely for the sake of form, and lies in the writings and
   agreement of the ancient Fathers. But, since the Christian Fathers have
   not all been authors, and few of those who have written, have concerned
   themselves with controversies, (which takes away from us the universal
   consent of all of them together,) this remedy is also useless, because
   it is a fact to the truth of which the Papists themselves assent, that
   it was possible for each of these Fathers to err. From this
   circumstance, therefore, we conclude, that the consent of all of them
   is not free from the risk of error, even if each had separately
   declared his own individual opinion in his writings. Besides, this
   general agreement is no easy matter; nay, it is to be obtained with the
   greatest difficulty; because it is in the power of very few persons,
   (if of any man whatever,) to make themselves acquainted with such
   universal consent, both on account of the bulky and almost innumerable
   volumes in which the writings of the Fathers are contained, and because
   the dispute among different parties is no less concerning the meaning
   of those Fathers than concerning that of the Scriptures, the contents
   of which are comprised in a book of small size when compared with the
   dimensions of their massy tomes. We are thus sent forth on an endless
   excursion, that we may at length be compelled to return to the
   Sovereign Pontiff.

   Thirdly. The other remedy of the papists is not much dissimilar to the
   preceding one. It is thus stated: The decrees of former councils may be
   consulted; from which, if it should appear that the controversy has
   been decided, the judgment then passed upon it must stand in the place
   of a definitive sentence: nor must any matter, the merits of which have
   been once decided, be brought again into judgment. But of what avail
   would this be, if a good cause had been badly defended, and had been
   overpowered and borne down, not by any defect in itself, but through
   the fault of those who were its defenders, and who were either awed
   into silence through fear, or betrayed their trust by an incompetent,
   foolish and injudicious defense? And of what consequence does such a
   remedy appear, if one and the same spirit of error have conducted on
   such an occasion both the attack and the defense. But grant that it has
   been fairly defended: Yet, I declare that The Cause Of Religion, Which
   Is The Cause Of God, Is Not An Affair To Be Submitted To Human
   Decision, or to be judged of man's judgment."

   The Papists add a Fourth remedy, which, on account of its fierce and
   most violent efficacy, will not easily be forgotten by us as a people
   who have been called to endure some of its cruelties. It acts like the
   fulcrum of a lever for confirming all the preceding suggestions, and is
   the foundation of the whole composition. It is this: "Whosoever refuses
   to listen to the councils and writings of the fathers, and to receive
   them as explained by the Church of Rome--whosoever refuses to listen to
   the Church, and especially to her husband, that High Priest and
   Prophet, the vicar of Christ and the successor of St. Peter, let that
   soul be cut off from among his people: And he who is unwilling to yield
   to an authority so sacred, must be compelled, under the sword of the
   executioner, to express his consent, or he must be avoided," which, in
   their language, signifies that he must be deprived of life. To murder
   and utterly to destroy the adverse and gainsaying parties is indeed, a
   most compendious method of removing all dissensions!

   In the midst of these difficulties, some persons have invented other
   remedies, which, since they are not within the power of man, ought,
   according to their views, to be asked of God in prayer.

   1. One is, that God would be pleased to raise some one from the dead,
   and send him to men: From such a messenger, they might then hope to
   know what is God's decisive judgment concerning the clashing opinions
   of the various dissidents. But this remedy is discountenanced by Christ
   when he says, "If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will
   they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead." (Luke xvi. 31.)

   2. Another of these remedies is, that God would by a miracle
   distinguish that party of whose sentiments he approves; which appears
   to have been a practice in the times of Elijah. But if no sect be
   entirely free from every particle of error, can it be expected that God
   will set the seal of his approval on any portion of falsity? But this
   wish is unnecessary, since the things which Christ did and spoke "are
   written that we might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God,
   and that, believing, we might have life through his name." (John xx.
   31.) But the remedy itself, if applied, would prove to be
   inefficacious. For even in the days of Christ and his apostles,
   dissensions existed; and many of them were excited against the
   primitive heralds of the gospel, although they had acquired great
   renown by the benevolent exercise of the miraculous powers with which
   they were endued. To this remark I must add that the approaching advent
   of Antichrist is predicted to be "with all power, and signs, and lying
   wonders." (2 Thess. ii. 9.)

   3. A third remedy, of a horrid description, remains to be noticed,
   which, nevertheless, is resorted to by some persons. It is an
   adjuration of the devil, to induce him by means of incantations and
   exorcisms to deliver an answer, from the bodies of deceased persons,
   concerning the truth of such doctrines as are at any period the
   existing subjects of controversy. This method is both a mark of the
   utmost desperation, and an execrable and insane love of demons.

   But, dismissing all these violent medicines, that are of a bad
   character and import, I proceed to notice such as are holy, true and
   saving; these I distribute into preparatives and aphretics or
   removers, of this dissension.

   1. To the class of preparatives belong, (1.) in the first place,
   Prayers and Supplications to God, that we may obtain a knowledge of the
   truth, and that the peace of the Church may be preserved: and these
   religious acts are to be performed, at the special command of the
   magistrates, with fasting, and in dust and ashes, with seriousness, in
   faith, and with assiduity. These services, when thus performed, cannot
   fail of being efficacious; because they are done according to the
   ordinance of God, whose command it is, that "we pray for the peace of
   Jerusalem," (Psalm cxxii. 6,) and according to the promise of Christ,
   who has graciously engaged that "the Spirit of truth shall be given to
   those who ask him." (Luke xi. 13.)

   (2.) Let a serious amendment of life and a conscientious course of
   conduct be added: For, without these, all our prayers are rendered
   ineffectual, because they are displeasing to God, on the ground, that
   "he who misemploys that portion of knowledge which he possesses,
   becomes, by his own act, unworthy of all further communications and
   increase of knowledge." This is in accordance with that saying of
   Christ: "Unto every one that hath, shall be given; and from him that
   hath not, even that which he hath shall be taken away from him." (Luke
   xix. 26.) But to all those who employ and improve the knowledge which
   is given to them, Christ promises the spirit of discernment. in these
   words: "If any man will do the will of my Father, he shall know of the
   doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself." (John
   viii. 17.)

   2. But amongst the very first removals, let those causes be put away
   which, as we have previously stated, have their origin in the
   affections, and which are not only the instigators of this dissension,
   but tend to perpetuate and keep it alive. Let humility overcome pride;
   let a mind contented with its condition become the successor of
   avarice; let the love of celestial delights expel all carnal pleasures;
   let good will and benevolence occupy the place of envy; let patient
   forbearance subdue anger; let sobriety in acquiring wisdom prescribe
   bounds to the desire of knowledge, and let studious application take
   the place of learned ignorance. Let all hatred and bitterness be laid
   aside; and, on the contrary, "let us put on bowels of mercies" towards
   those who differ from us, and who appear either to wander about in the
   paths of error, or to scatter its noxious seeds among others.

   These necessary concessions we shall obtain from our minds without much
   difficulty, if the following four considerations become the objects of
   our sedulous attention:

   First. How extremely difficult it is to discover the truth an all
   subjects, and to avoid error. On this topic, St. Augustine most
   beautifully descants, when he thus addresses those worst of heretics,
   the Manichees: "Let those persons be enraged against you, who are
   ignorant of the immense labour that is required for the discovery of
   truth, and how difficult it is to guard against error. Let those be
   enraged against you who know not how uncommon a circumstance and how
   arduous a toil it is to overcome carnal fantasies, when such a conquest
   is put in comparison with serenity of mind. Let those be enraged
   against you who are not aware of the great difficulty with which the
   eye of "the inner man" is healed, so as to be able to look up to God as
   the sun of the system. Let those be enraged against you, who are
   personally unconscious of the many sighs and groans which must be
   uttered before we are capable of understanding God in the slightest
   degree. And, lastly, let them be enraged against you, who have never
   been deceived by an error of such a description as that under which
   they see you labouring. But how angry soever all these persons may be,
   I cannot be in the least enraged against you, whose weaknesses it is my
   duty to bear, as those who were near me at that period bore with mine;
   and I ought now to treat you with as much patience as that which was
   exercised towards me when, frantic and blind, I went astray in the
   errors of your doctrine."

   Secondly. That those who hold erroneous opinions have been induced
   through ignorance to adopt them, is far more probable, than that malice
   has influenced them to contrive a method of consigning themselves and
   other people to eternal destruction.

   Thirdly. It is possible that they who entertain these mistaken
   sentiments, are of the number of the elect, whom God, it is true, may
   have permitted to fall, but only with this design, that he may raise
   them up with the greater glory. How then can we indulge ourselves in
   any harsh or unmerciful resolutions against these persons, who have
   been destined to possess the heavenly inheritance, who are our
   brethren, the members of Christ, and not only the servants but the sons
   of the Lord Most High?

   Lastly. Let us place ourselves in the circumstances of an adversary,
   and let him in return assume the character which we sustain; since it
   is as possible for us, as it is for him, to hold wrong principles. When
   we have made this experiment, we may be brought to think, that the very
   person whom we had previously thought to be in error, and whose
   mistakes in our eyes had a destructive tendency, may perhaps have been
   given to us by God, that out of his mouth we may learn the truth which
   has hitherto been unknown to us.

   To these four reflections, let there be added, a consideration of all
   those articles of religion respecting which there exists on both sides
   a perfect agreement. These will perhaps be found to be so numerous and
   of such great importance, that when a comparison is instituted between
   them, and the others which may properly be made the subjects of
   controversy, the latter will be found to be few in number and of small
   consequence. This is the very method which a certain famous prince in
   France is reported to have adopted, when Cardinal Lorraine attempted to
   embroil the Lutherans, or those who adhered to the Augustan Confession,
   with the French Protestants, that he might interrupt and neutralize the
   salutary provisions of the Conference at Poissy, which had been
   instituted between the Protestants and the Papists.

   But since it is customary after long and grievous wars, to enter into a
   truce, or a cessation from hostilities, prior to the conclusion of a
   treaty of peace and its final ratification; and, since, during the
   continuance of a truce, while every hostile attempt is laid aside,
   peaceful thoughts are naturally suggested, till at length a general
   solicitude is expressed with regard to the method in which a firm peace
   and lasting reconciliation may best be effected; it is my special wish,
   that there may now be among us a similar cessation from the asperitics
   of religious warfare, and that both parties would abstain from writings
   full of bitterness, from sermons remarkable only for the invectives
   which they contain, and from the unchristian practice of mutual
   anathematizing and execration. Instead of these, let the
   controversialists substitute writings full of moderation, in which the
   matters of controversy may, without respect of persons, be clearly
   explained and proved by cogent arguments:

   Let such sermons be preached as are calculated to excite the minds of
   the people to the love and study of truth, charity, mercy,
   long-suffering, and concord; which may inflame the minds both of
   Governors and people with a desire of concluding a pacification, and
   may make them willing to carry into effect such a remedy as is, of all
   others, the best accommodated to remove dissensions.

   That remedy is, an orderly and free convention of the parties that
   differ from each other: In such an assembly, (called by the Greeks a
   Synod and by the Latins a Council,) after the different sentiments have
   been compared together, and the various reasons of each have been
   weighed, in the fear of the Lord, and with calmness and accuracy, let
   the members deliberate, consult and determine what the word of God
   declares concerning the matters in controversy, and afterwards let them
   by common consent promulge and declare the result to the Churches.

   The Chief Magistrates, who profess the Christian religion, will summon
   and convene this Synod, in virtue of the Supreme official authority
   with which they are divinely invested, and according to the practice
   that formerly prevailed in the Jewish Church, and that was afterwards
   adopted by the Christian Church and continued nearly to the nine
   hundredth year after the birth of Christ, until the Roman Pontiff began
   through tyranny to arrogate this authority to himself. Such an
   arrangement is required by the public weal, which is never committed
   with greater safety to the custody of any one than to his whose private
   advantage is entirely unconnected, with the issue.

   But men endued with wisdom will be summoned to this Synod, and will be
   admitted into it--men who are well qualified for a seat in it by the
   sanctity of their lives, and their general experience--men burning with
   zeal for God and for the salvation of their mankind, and inflamed with
   the love of truth and peace. Into such a choice assembly all those
   persons will be admitted who are acknowledged for any probable reason
   to possess the Spirit of Christ, the Spirit of discernment between
   truth and falsehood, between good and evil, and those who promise to
   abide by the Scriptures, that have been inspired by the same Holy
   Spirit. Not only will ecclesiastics be admitted, but also laymen,
   whether they be entitled to any superiority on account of the dignity
   of the office which they sustain, or whether they be persons in private
   stations. Not only will the representatives of one party, or of some
   parties, be admitted, but deputies from all the parties that disagree,
   whether they have been defenders of the conflicting opinions that are
   at issue, or whether they have never publicly explained their own
   sentiments either in discourse or by writing. But it is of the utmost
   consequence, that this sentence should, after the manner of Plato, be
   inscribed in letters of gold on the porch of the building in which this
   sacred meeting holds its sittings:

   "Let no one that is not desirous of promoting the interests of truth
   and peace, enter this hallowed dome" It is my sincere and earnest wish,
   that God would "place his angel with a flaming two-edged sword at the
   entrance of this paradise," in which Divine Truth and the lovely
   Concord of the Church will be the subjects of discussion; and that he
   would by his Angel drive away all those who might be animated with a
   spirit averse to truth and concord, while the sacred guardian repeats,
   in tones terrific and a voice of thunder, the warning words used by the
   followers of Pythagoras and Orpheus preparatory to the commencement of
   their sacred rites:

   Far, far from hence, ye multitude profane!

   The situation and other circumstances of the town or city appointed for
   holding such a Council, must not be neglected. It should be so
   accommodated to the convenience of those who have to assemble in it,
   that neither the difficulty of approaching it, nor the length of the
   journey to it, should operate as a hindrance on any of the members
   deputed. It should be a place free from danger and violence, and
   secured against all surprise and ambuscades, in order that those who
   are summoned may come to it, remain in it, and return to their homes,
   in perfect safety. To secure these benefits, it will be necessary for a
   public pledge to be given to all the members and solemnly observed.

   In this council the subjects of discussion will not be, the
   jurisdiction, honours, and rights of precedence on the part of princes,
   the wealth, power and privileges of Bishops, the commencement of war
   against the Turks, or any other political matters. But its discussions
   will relate solely to those things which pertain to Religion: Of this
   description are the doctrines which concern faith and manners, and
   ecclesiastical order. (1.) In these doctrines, there are two objects
   worthy of consideration, which are indeed of the greatest consequence:
   (i.) Their truth, and (ii.) The degree of necessity which exists for
   knowing, believing and practicing ecclesiastical order, because a good
   part of it is positive and only requires to be accommodated to persons,
   places and seasons, it will be easily dispatched.

   The end of such a holy convention will be the illustration,
   preservation, and propagation of the truth; the extirpation of existing
   errors, and the concord of the Church. The consequence of all which,
   will be the glory of God and the eternal salvation of men.

   The presidency of that assembly belongs to HIM ALONE who is the Head
   and the Husband of the Church, to Christ by his Holy Spirit. For he has
   promised to be present in a company that may consist only of two or
   three individuals gathered together in his name: His assistance,
   therefore, will be earnestly implored at the beginning and end of each
   of their sessions. But for the sake of order, moderation, and good
   government, and to avoid confusion, it will be necessary to have
   presidents subordinate to Christ Jesus. It is my sincere wish that the
   magistrates would themselves undertake that office in the Council; and
   this might be obtained from them as a favour. But in case of their
   reluctance, either some members deputed from their body, or some
   persons chosen by the whole Synod, ought to act in that capacity. The
   duties of these Presidents will consist in convening the assembly,
   proposing the subjects of deliberation, putting questions to the vote,
   collecting the suffrages of each member by means of accredited
   secretaries, and in directing the whole of the proceedings. The course
   of action to be adopted in the Synod itself, is this; (1.) a regular
   and accurate debate on the matters in controversy, (2.) mature
   consultation concerning them, and (3.) complete liberty for every one
   to declare his opinion. The rule to be observed in all these
   transactions is the Word of God, recorded in the books of the Old and
   New Testament. The power and influence which the most ancient Councils
   ascribed to this sacred rule, were pointed out by the significant
   action of placing a copy of the Gospels in the first and most
   honourable seat in the assembly. On this point the parties between whom
   the difference subsists, should be mutually agreed. (1.) The debates
   will not be conducted according to the rules of Rhetoric, but according
   to Dialectics. But a logical and concise mode of reasoning will be
   employed; and all precipitancy of speech and extempore effusions will
   be avoided. To each of the parties such an equal space of time will be
   allowed as may appear necessary for due meditation: and, to avoid many
   inconveniences and absurdities, every speech intended for delivery will
   be comprised in writing, and will be recited from the manuscript. No
   one shall be permitted to interrupt or to close a disputation, unless,
   in the opinion of the whole assembly, it appear that sufficient reasons
   have been advanced to satisfy the subject under discussion. (2.) When a
   disputation is finished, a grave and mature deliberation will be
   instituted both concerning the controversies themselves and the
   arguments employed by both sides; that, the limits of the matter under
   dispute being laid down with great strictness, and the amplitude of
   debate being contracted into a very narrow compass, the question on
   which the assembly has to decide and pronounce may be perceived as at
   one glance with complete distinctness. (3.) To these will succeed, in
   the proper course, a free declaration of opinion--a right, the benefit
   of which will belong equally to all that are convened of each party,
   without excluding from it any of those who though not invited, may have
   voluntarily come to the town or city in which the Synod is convened,
   and who may have been admitted into it by the consent of the members.

   And since nothing to the present period has proved to be a greater
   hindrance to the investigation of truth or to the conclusion of an
   agreement, than this circumstance--that those who have been convened
   were so restricted and confined to received opinions as to bring from
   home with them the declaration which they were to make on every subject
   in the Synod: it is, therefore, necessary that all the members
   assembled, should, prior to the commencement of any proceedings, take a
   solemn oath, not to indulge in prevarication or calumny. By this oath
   they ought to promise that every thing shall be transacted in the fear
   of the Lord, and according to a good conscience; the latter of which
   consists, in not asserting that which they consider to be false, in not
   concealing that which they think to be the truth, (how much soever such
   truth may be opposed to them and their party,) and in not pressing upon
   others for absolute certainties those points which seem, even to
   themselves, to be doubtful. By this oath they should also promise that
   every thing shall be conducted according to the rule of the word of
   God, without favour or affection, and without any partiality or respect
   of persons; that the whole of their attention in that assembly shall be
   solely directed to promote an inquiry after truth and to consolidate
   Christian concord; and that they will acquiesce in the sentence of the
   Synod on all those things of which they shall be convinced by the word
   of God. On which account let them be absolved from all other oaths,
   either immediately or indirectly contrary to this by which they have
   been bound either to Churches and their confessions, or to schools and
   their masters, or even to princes themselves, with an exception in
   favour of the right and jurisdiction which the latter have over their
   subjects. Constituted after this manner, such a Synod will truly be a
   free assembly, most suitable and appropriate for the investigation of
   truth and the establishment of concord. This is an opinion which is
   countenanced by St. Augustine, who, expostulating with the Manichees,
   in continuation of the passage which we have just quoted, proceeds
   thus: "But that you may become milder and may be the more easily
   pacified, O Manicheans, and that you may no longer place yourselves in
   opposition to me, with a mind full of hostility which is most
   pernicious to yourselves, it is my duty to request of you (whoever he
   may be that shall judge betwixt us,) that all arrogance be laid aside
   by both parties; and that none of us say, that he has discovered the
   truth. But rather let us seek it, as though it were unknown to each of
   us. For thus it will be possible for each of us to be engaged in a
   diligent and amicable search for it, if we have not by a premature and
   rash presumption believed that it is an object which we had previously
   discovered, and with which we are well acquainted."

   From a Synod thus constructed and managed, those who rely on the
   promise of God may expect most abundant profit and the greatest
   advantages. For, though Christ be provoked to anger by our manifold
   trespasses and offenses, yet the thought must not be once indulged,
   that his church will be neglected by him; or, when his faithful
   servants and teachable disciples are, with simplicity of heart, engaged
   in a search after truth and peace, and are devoutly imploring the grace
   of his Holy Spirit, that He will on any account suffer them to fall
   into such errors as are opposed to truths accounted fundamental, and to
   persevere in them when their tendency is thus injurious. From the
   decisions of a Synod that is influenced by such expectations, unanimity
   and agreement will be obtained on all the doctrines, or at least on the
   principal part of them, and especially on those which are supported by
   clear testimonies from the Scriptures.

   But if it should happen, that a mutual consent and agreement cannot be
   obtained on some articles, then, it appears to me, one of these two
   courses must be pursued. First. It must become a matter of deep
   consideration, whether a fraternal concord in Christ, cannot exist
   between the two parties, and whether one cannot acknowledge the other
   for partakers of the same faith and fellow-heirs of the same salvation,
   although they may both hold different sentiments concerning the nature
   of faith and the manner of salvation. If either party refuse to extend
   to the other the right hand of fellowship, the party so offending
   shall, by the unanimous declaration of all the members, be commanded to
   prove from plain and obvious passages of scripture, that the importance
   attached to the controverted articles is so great as not to permit
   those who dissent from them to be one in Christ Jesus. Secondly. After
   having made every effort toward producing a Christian and fraternal
   union, if they find that this cannot be effected, in such a state of
   affairs the second plan must be adopted, which indeed the conscience of
   no man can under any pretext refuse. The right hand of friendship
   should be extended by both parties, and all of them should enter into a
   solemn engagement, by which they should bind themselves, as by oath,
   and under the most sacred obligations, to abstain in future from all
   bitterness, evil speaking, and railing; to preach with gentleness and
   moderation, to the people entrusted to their care, that truth which
   they deem necessary; and to confute those falsities which they consider
   to be inimical to salvation and injurious to the glory of God; and,
   while engaged in such a confutation of error, (however great their
   earnestness may be,) to let their zeal be under the direction of
   knowledge and attempered with kindness. On him who shall resolve to
   adopt a course of conduct different to this, let the imprecations of an
   incensed God and his Christ be invoked, and let the magistrates not
   only threaten him with deserved punishment, but let it be actually
   inflicted.

   But the Synod will not assume to itself the authority of obtruding upon
   others, by force, those resolutions which may have been passed by
   unanimous consent. For this reflection should always suggest itself,
   "Though this Synod appears to have done all things conscientiously, it
   is possible, that, after all, it has committed an error in judgment.
   Such a diffidence and moderation of mind will possess greater power,
   and will have more influence, than any immoderate or excessive rigor
   can have, on the consciences both of the contumacious dissidents, and
   of the whole body of the faithful; because, according to Lactantius,
   "To recommend faith to others, we must make it the subject of
   persuasion, and not of compulsion." Tertullian also says, "Nothing is
   less a religious business than to employ coercion about religion." For
   these disturbers will either then (1.) desist from creating further
   trouble to the Church by the frequent, unreasonable and outrageous
   inculcation of their opinions, which, with all their powers of
   persuasion, they were not able to prevail with such a numerous assembly
   of impartial and moderate men to adopt. Or, (2.) being exposed to the
   just indignation of all these individuals, they will scarcely find a
   person willing to lend an ear to teachers of such a refractory and
   obstinate disposition. If this should not prove to be the result, then
   it must be concluded that there are no remedies calculated to remove
   all evils; but those must be employed which have in them the least
   peril. The mild and affectionate expostulation of Christ our saviour,
   must also live in our recollections. He addressed his disciples and
   said, "Will ye also go away ," (John vi. 67.) We must use the same
   interrogation; and must rest at that point and cease from all ulterior
   measures.

   My very famous, most polite and courteous hearers, these are the
   remarks which have been impressed on my mind, and which I have
   accounted it my duty at this time to declare concerning the
   reconciliation of religious differences. The short time usually
   allotted to the delivery of an address on this occasion, and the
   defects of my own genius, have prevented me from treating this subject
   according to its dignity and amplitude.

   May the God of truth and peace inspire the hearts of the magistrates,
   the people and the ministers of religion, with an ardent desire for
   truth and peace. May He exhibit before their eyes, in all its naked
   deformity, the execrable and polluting nature of dissension concerning
   religion; and may He affect their hearts with a serious sense of these
   evils which flow so copiously from it; that they may unite all their
   prayers, counsels, endeavours, and desires, and may direct them to one
   point, the removal of the causes of such a great evil, the adoption of
   a mild and sanatory process, and the application of gentle remedies for
   healing this dissension, which are the only description of medicines of
   which the very weak and sickly condition of the body of the Church, and
   the nature of the malady, will admit. "The God of peace," who dignifies
   "the peace makers" alone with the ample title of "children,"(Matt. v.
   9,) has called us to the practice of peace. Christ, "the Prince of
   peace," who by his precious blood, procured peace for us, has
   bequeathed and recommended it to us with a fraternal affection. (John
   xiv. 27.) It has also been sealed to us by the Holy Spirit, who is the
   bond of peace, and who has united all of us in one body by the closest
   ties of the new covenant. (Ephes. iv. 3.)

   Let us be ashamed of contaminating such a splendid title as this by our
   petty contentions; let it rather be to us an object of pursuit, since
   God has called us to such a course. Let us not suffer that which has
   been purchased at such a great price to be consumed, and wasted away in
   the midst of our disputes and dissensions; but let us embrace it,
   because our Lord Christ has given it the sanction of his
   recommendation. Let us not permit a covenant of such great sanctity to
   be made void by our factious divisions; but, since it is sealed to us
   by the Holy Spirit, let us attend to all its requisitions and preserve
   the terms inviolate. Fabius, the Roman ambassador, told the
   Carthaginians, "that he carried to them in his bosom both War and
   Peace, that they might choose either of them that was the object of
   their preference." Depending not on my own strength, but on the
   goodness of God, the promises of Christ, and on the gentle attestations
   of the Holy Spirit, I venture to imitate his expressions, (full of
   confidence although they be,) and to say, "Only let us choose peace and
   God will perfect it for us." Then will the happy period arrive when
   with gladness we shall hear the voices of brethren mutually exhorting
   each other, and saying, "Let us go into the house of the Lord," that he
   may explain to us his will; that "our feet may joyfully stand within
   the gates of Jerusalem;" that in an ecstasy of delight we may
   contemplate the Church of Christ," as a city that is compact together,
   whither the tribes go up, the tribes of the Lord, unto the testimony of
   Israel to give thanks unto the name of the Lord:" that with
   thanksgiving we may admire "the thrones of judgment which are set
   there, the thrones of the house of David," the thrones of men of
   veracity, of princes who in imitation of David's example are peace
   makers, and of magistrates who conform themselves to the similitude of
   the man after God's own heart. Thus shall we enjoy the felicity to
   accost each other in cheerful converse, and by way of encouragement
   sweetly to whisper in the ears of each other, "pray for the peace of
   the Church Universal," and in our mutual prayers let us invoke
   "prosperity on them that love her;" that with unanimous voice, from the
   inmost recesses of our hearts, we may consecrate to her these votive
   intercessions and promises. "Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity
   within thy palaces: for our brethren and companions' sakes, we will now
   say, peace be within thee! Because of the house of the Lord our God we
   will seek thy good." (Psalm 122.) Thus at length shall it come to pass,
   that, being anointed with spiritual delights we shall sing together in
   jubilant strains, that most pleasant Song of Degrees, "Behold how good
   and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity," &c.
   And, from a sight of the orderly walk and peaceable conduct of the
   faithful in the house of God, filled with the hopes of consummating
   these acts of pacification in heaven, we may conclude in these words of
   the Apostle, "And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on
   them, and mercy upon the Israel of God." (Gal. vi. 16.) Mercy,
   therefore, and Peace, be upon the Israel of God. I have concluded.
     __________________________________________________________________

                 A Declaration Of The Sentiments Of Arminius On

   On Predestination

   Divine Providence

   The Freedom Of The Will

   The Grace Of God

   The Perseverance Of The Saints

   The Assurance Of Salvation

   The Perfection Of Believers In This Life

   The Divinity Of The Son Of God

   The Justification Of Man Before God
     __________________________________________________________________

REVISION OF THE DUTCH CONFESSION & HEIDELBERG CATECHISM

   To the noble and most potent the states of Holland and West Friezland,
   my Supreme Governor, my most noble, potent, wise and prudent Lords:

   After the conference which, by the command of your mightinesses, was
   convened here at the Hague, between Gomarus and myself, had been held
   in the presence of four ministers and under the superintendence of
   their Lordships the Counselors of the Supreme Court, the result of that
   meeting was reported to your highnesses. Some allusion having been made
   in that report to the nature and importance of the controversy between
   us, it soon afterward, seemed good to your highnesses to cite each of
   us, with those four ministers, to appear openly before you in your
   honourable assembly, and in that public manner to intimate to all of us
   whatever you then judged to be expedient. After we had appeared before
   Your mightinesses, Gomarus affirmed, "that the controversy between him
   and me, was of such immense importance, that, with the opinions which I
   professed, he durst not appear in the presence of his maker." He
   likewise asserted, "that, unless some mode of prevention were promptly
   devised, the consequence would be, that the various provinces,
   churches, and cities of our native land, and even the citizens
   themselves, would be placed in a state of mutual enmity and variance,
   and would rise up in arms against each other." To all those allegations
   I then made no reply, except "that I certainly was not conscious of
   entertaining any such atrocious sentiments in religion, as those of
   which he had spoken; and I confidently expressed a hope, that I should
   never afford either cause or occasion for schism and separation, in the
   Church of God or in our common country." In confirmation of which, I
   added, "that I was prepared to make an open and bona fide declaration
   of all my sentiments, views, and designs on every subject connected
   with religion, whenever I might receive a summons to appear before this
   august assembly, and even prior to my retiring at that time from your
   presence." Your highnesses having since deliberated upon the proposal
   and offer which I then made, deem it proper now to summon me before
   you, for the purpose of redeeming, in this hall, the pledge which I had
   previously given. To fulfill that promise, I now appear in this place,
   and will with all due fidelity discharge my duty, whatever it be that
   is demanded of me in relation to this affair.

   Yet since a sinister report, has for a long time been industriously and
   extensively circulated about me, not only among my own countrymen but
   also among foreigners, in which report, I am represented to have
   hitherto refused, after frequent solicitations, to make an open
   profession of my sentiments on the matter of religion and my designs
   concerning it; and since this unfounded rumor has already operated most
   injuriously against me, I importunately intreat to be favoured with
   your gracious permission to make an ingenuous and open declaration of
   all the circumstances which relate to this business, before I proceed
   to the discussion of other topics.
     __________________________________________________________________

  1. Account of a Conference proposed to me, but which I refused.

   On the 30th of June, in the year 1605, three Deputies of the Synod of
   South Holland came to me at Leyden; they were Francis Lansbergius,
   Libertus Fraxinus, and Daniel Dolegius of pious memory, each of them
   the minister of their respective churches at Rotterdam, the Hague, and
   Delft. Two members of the Synod of North Holland accompanied them-John
   Bogardus, minister of the Church at Haerlem, and James Rolandus of the
   Church at Amsterdam. They told me, "they had heard, that at the regular
   meetings of certain of their classes, in the examination to which
   candidates for holy orders must submit prior to their admission into
   the Christian ministry, some of the students of the University of
   Leyden had returned such answers to the questions propounded to them as
   were of a novel description and contrary to the common and received
   doctrine of the Churches. Those novelties," it was said, "the young men
   affirmed to have been instilled into them while under my tuition." In
   such a situation of affairs, they desired me "to engage in a friendly
   conference with them, by which they might have it in their power to
   perceive if there were any truth in this charge, and that they might
   afterwards be the better qualified to consult the interests of the
   Church." To these suggestions I replied, "that I could by no means
   approve of the mode of proceeding which they recommended: For such a
   course would inevitably subject me to frequent and almost incessant
   applications for a friendly interview and conversation, if any one
   thought it needful to pester me in that manner whenever a student made
   use of a new or uncommon answer, and in excuse pretended to have
   learned it from me. The following therefore appeared to me a plan of
   greater wisdom and prudence: As often as a student during his
   examination returned any answer, which, according to his affirmation,
   had been derived from my instructions, provided the brethren considered
   such answer to stand in opposition to the confession and catechism of
   the Belgic Churches, they should immediately confront that student with
   me; and, for the sake of investigating such an affair, I was ready to
   proceed at my own expense to any town, however distant, which it might
   please the brethren to appoint for that purpose. The obvious
   consequence of this method would be, that, after it had been resorted
   to a few times, it would cause it clearly and evidently to appear
   whether the student's assertion were the truth or only a calumny.

   But when Francis Lansbergius, in the name of the rest of his brethren,
   continued to urge and solicit a conference I gave it as a further
   reason why I could not see the propriety of entering into a conference
   with them, that they appeared before me in the character of deputies,
   who had afterwards to render to the Synod an account of all their
   proceedings; and that I was not therefore at liberty to accede to their
   wishes, unless, not only with the knowledge and consent, but at the
   express command of others who were my superiors, and whom I was equally
   with them bound to obey. Besides, it would be connected with no small
   risk and danger to me, if, in the relation of the event of our
   conference which they might hereafter give to the Synod, I should leave
   that relation entirely to their faithfulness and discretion. They had
   likewise no cause for demanding any thing of this kind from me, who was
   quite unconscious of having propounded a single doctrine, either at
   Leyden or Amsterdam, that was contrary to the word of God or to the
   Confession and Catechism of the Churches in the Low Countries. For no
   such accusation had ever yet been brought against me by any person;
   and, I was confident, no attempt would be made to substantiate against
   me a charge of this description, if he who preferred such a charge were
   bound at the same time either to establish it by proofs, or, in failure
   of his proofs, to confess his uncharitable offense."
     __________________________________________________________________

  2. An offer on my part, of a conference with these Deputies, which they
  refused.

   I then told these five gentlemen, "that, notwithstanding all this, if
   they would consent to relinquish the title Deputies, and would each in
   his own private capacity enter into a conference with me, I was ready
   at that very moment to engage in it." The conditions which I proposed
   to be mutually observed by us, were these: (i.) That they should
   explain their opinions on every single article and then I would explain
   mine; (ii.) They should adduce their proofs, and I would adduce mine;
   and (iii.) That they should at last attempt a refutation of my
   sentiments and reasons, and I would in return try to refute theirs.
   (iv.) If in this manner either party could afford complete satisfaction
   to the other, the result would be agreeable: but, if neither party
   could satisfy the other, then no mention of the subjects discussed in
   our private conference, or of its unfavourable termination, should be
   made in any place or company whatever, until the whole affair should be
   referred to a national Synod."

   But when to this proposition they had given a direct refusal, we should
   have separated from each other without further discourse, had I not
   requested "that they would offer a conference in the same manner to
   Gomarus, as well as to Trelcatius of pious memory, because it did not
   appear to me, that I had given them any cause for making such a demand
   upon me, rather than upon either of my two colleagues." At the same
   time I enforced my concluding expressions with several arguments, which
   it would be too tedious now to repeat in the presence of your
   mightinesses. When I had finished, the deputies replied, "that they
   would comply with my request, and would wait on the two other
   professors of divinity and make them a similar offer:" and prior to
   their departure from Leyden, they called and assured me, that they had
   in this particular fulfilled their promise.

   This, then, is the first of the many requests that have been preferred
   to me. It was the cause of much conversation at the time when it
   occurred: For many persons spoke about it. Some of them related it
   imperfectly, and in a manner very different from what were the real
   circumstances of the whole transaction; while others suppressed many
   essential particulars, and studiously concealed the counter-proposal
   which I had tendered to the deputies and the strong reasons which I
   produced in its support.
     __________________________________________________________________

  3. Another application is made to me.

   A few days afterwards, that is, on the 28th of July in the same year,
   1605, a request of a similar character was likewise presented to me, in
   the name of the Presbytery of the Church of Leyden: but on this
   condition, that if I approved of it, other persons, whom such a request
   equally concerned, should also be summoned before the same
   ecclesiastical tribunal: but if this offer did not receive my
   approbation, nothing further should be attempted. But when I had
   intimated, that I did not clearly perceive, how this request could
   possibly obtain approval from me, and when I had subjoined my reasons
   which were of the same description as those which I had employed on the
   preceding occasion, my answer was perfectly satisfactory to Bronchovius
   the Burgomaster [of Leyden] and Merula of pious memory, both of whom
   had come to me in the name of that Church of which they were the
   elders, and they determined to abandon all ulterior proceedings in that
   business.
     __________________________________________________________________

  4. The request of the Deputies of the Synod of South Holland to their
  Lordships, the visitors of the University, and the answer which they received.

   On the ninth of November, in the same year, 1605, the deputies of the
   Synod of South Holland, Francis Lansbergius, Festus Hommius, and their
   associates, presented nine questions to their Lordships, the curators
   of the University of Leyden; these were accompanied with a petition,
   "that the Professors of Divinity might be commanded to answer them."
   But the curators replied, "that they could on no account sanction by
   their consent the propounding of any questions to the Professors of
   Divinity; and if any one supposed that something was taught in the
   University contrary to truth and rectitude, that person had it in his
   power to refer the matter of his complaint to a national Synod, which,
   it was hoped, would, at the earliest opportunity be convened, when it
   would come regularly under the cognizance of that assembly, and receive
   the most ample discussion." When this answer had been delivered, the
   deputies of the Synod did not hesitate earnestly to ask it as a
   particular favour, "that, by the kind permission of their Lordships,
   they might themselves propose those nine questions to the Professors of
   Divinity, and might, without troubling their Lordships, personally
   inform themselves what answer of his own accord, and without
   reluctance, each of those three Divines would return." But, after all
   their pleading, they were unable to obtain the permission which they so
   strenuously desired. The whole of this unsuccessful negotiation was
   conducted in such a clandestine manner, and so carefully concealed from
   me, that I was totally ignorant even of the arrival of those reverend
   deputies in our city; yet soon after their departure, I became
   acquainted with their mission and its failure.
     __________________________________________________________________

  5. A fourth request of the same kind.

   After this, a whole year elapsed before I was again called to an
   account about such matters. But I must not omit to mention, that in the
   year 1607, a short time before the meeting of the Synod of South
   Holland at Delft, John Bernards, minister of the Church at Delft,
   Festus Hommius, minister of Leyden, and Dibbetius of Dort, were deputed
   by the Synod to come to me and inquire what progress I had made in the
   refutation of the Anabaptists. When I had given them a suitable reply
   concerning that affair, which was the cause of much conversation among
   us on both sides, and when they were just on the point of taking their
   leave, they begged "that I would not hesitate to reveal to them
   whatever views and designs I had formed on the subject of religion, for
   the purpose of their being communicated to the Synod, by the Deputies,
   for the satisfaction of the brethren." But I refused to comply with
   their intreaties, "because the desired explanation could not be given
   either conveniently or to advantage; and I did not know any place in
   which it was possible to explain these matters with greater propriety,
   than in the national Synod; which, according to the resolution of their
   most noble and high mightinesses, the States General, was expected very
   shortly to assemble." I promised "that I would use every exertion that
   I might be enabled in that assembly openly to profess the whole of my
   sentiments; and that I would employ none of that alleged concealment or
   dissimulation about any thing of which they might then complain." I
   concluded by saying, "that if I were to make my profession before them
   as deputies of the Synod of South Holland, I could not commit to their
   fidelity the relation of what might transpire, because, in matters of
   this description, every one was the most competent interpreter of his
   own meaning." After these mutual explanations, we parted from each
   other.
     __________________________________________________________________

  6. The same request is privately repeated to me, and my answer to it.

   In addition to these different applications, I was privately desired,
   by certain ministers, "not to view it as a hardship to communicate my
   views and intentions to their colleagues, the brethren assembled in
   Synod:" while others intreated me "to disclose my views to them, that
   they might have an opportunity of pondering and examining them by
   themselves, in the fear of the Lord," and they gave me an assurance
   "that they would not divulge any portion of the desired communication"
   To the first of these two classes, I gave in common my usual answer,
   "that they had no reason for demanding such an account from me, rather
   than from others, but to one of these ministers, who was not among the
   last of the two kinds of applicants, I proposed a conference at three
   different times, concerning all the articles of our religion; in which
   we might consider and devise the best means that could possibly be
   adopted for establishing the truth on the most solid foundation, and
   for completely refuting every species of falsehood. It was also a part
   of my offer that such conference should be held in the presence of
   certain of the principal men of our country; but he did not accept of
   this condition. To the rest of the inquirers, I returned various
   answers; in some of which I plainly denied what they requested of me,
   and in others, I made some disclosures to the inquirers. My sole rule
   in making such a distinction, was, the more intimate or distant degree
   of acquaintance which I had with the parties. In the mean time it
   frequently happened, that, a short time after I had thus revealed any
   thing in confidence to an individual, it was slanderously related to
   others--how seriously soever he might have asserted in my presence,
   that what I had then imparted to him was, according to his judgment,
   agreeable to the truth, and although he had solemnly pledged his honour
   that he would on no account divulge it.
     __________________________________________________________________

  7. What occurred relative to the same subject in the Preparatory Convention.

   To these it is also necessary to add a report which has been spread
   abroad by means of letters, not only within these provinces, but far
   beyond their confines: it is, "that, in the preparatory convention
   which was held at the Hague, in the month of June, 1607, by a company
   of the brethren who were convened by a summons from their high
   mightinesses, the States General, after I had been asked in a manner
   the most friendly to consent to a disclosure, before the brethren then
   present, of my views on the subject of the Christian faith, I refused;
   and although they promised to endeavour, as far as it was possible, to
   give me satisfaction, I still declined to comply with their wishes."
   But since I find by experience that this distorted version of the
   matter has procured for me not a few proofs of hatred and ill will from
   many persons who think that far more honourable deference ought to have
   been evinced by me towards that assembly, which was a convention of
   Divines from each of the United Provinces. I perceive a necessity is
   thus imposed upon me to commence at the very origin of this
   transaction, when I am about to relate the manner in which it occurred:

   Before my departure from Leyden for the convention at the Hague which
   has just been mentioned, five articles were put into my hands, said to
   have been transmitted to some of the provinces, to have been perused by
   certain ministers and ecclesiastical assemblies, and considered by them
   as documents which embraced my sentiments on several points of
   religion. Those points of which they pretended to exhibit a correct
   delineation, were Predestination, the Fall of Adam, Free-will, Original
   Sin, and the Eternal Salvation of Infants. When I had read the whole of
   them, I thought that I plainly perceived, from the style in which they
   were written, who was the author of them; and as he was then present,
   (being one of the number summoned on that occasion,) I accosted him on
   this subject, and embraced that opportunity freely to intimate to him
   that I had good reasons for believing those articles to have been of
   his composition. He did not make any attempt to deny the correctness of
   this supposition, and replied, that they had not been distributed
   precisely as my articles, but as those on which the students at Leyden
   had held disputations." In answer to this remark, I told him, "of one
   thing he must be very conscious, that, by the mere act of giving
   circulation to such a document, he could not avoid creating a grievous
   and immediate prejudice against my innocence, and that the same
   articles would soon be ascribed to me, as if they had been my
   composition: when, in reality," as I then openly affirmed, "they had
   neither proceeded from me, nor accorded with my sentiments, and, as
   well as I could form a judgment they appeared to me to be at variance
   with the word of God."

   After he and I had thus discoursed together in the presence of only two
   other persons, I deemed it advisable to make some mention of this
   affair in the convention itself, at which certain persons attended who
   had read those very articles, and who had, according to their own
   confession, accounted them as mine. This plan I accordingly pursued;
   and just as the convention was on the point of being dissolved, and
   after the account of our proceedings had been signed, and some
   individuals had received instructions to give their high mightinesses
   the States General a statement of our transactions, I requested the
   brethren "not to consider it an inconvenience to remain a short time
   together, for I had something which I was desirous to communicate."
   They assented to this proposal, and I told them "that I had received
   the five articles which I held in my hand and the tenor of which I
   briefly read to them; that I discovered they had been transmitted by a
   member of that convention, into different provinces; that I was
   positive concerning their distribution in Zealand and the diocese of
   Utrecht; and that they had been read by some ministers in their public
   meetings, and were considered to be documents which comprehended my
   sentiments." Yet, notwithstanding, I protested to the whole of that
   assembly, with a good conscience, and as in the presence of God, "that
   those articles were not mine, and did not contain my sentiments." Twice
   I repeated this solemn asseveration, and besought the brethren "not so
   readily to attach credit to reports that were circulated concerning me,
   nor so easily to listen to any thing that was represented as proceeding
   from me or that had been rumored abroad to my manifest injury."

   To these observations, a member of that convention answered, "that it
   would be well for me, on this account, to signify to the brethren what
   portion of those articles obtained my approbation, and what portion I
   disavowed, that they might thus have an opportunity of becoming
   acquainted in some degree with my sentiments." Another member urged the
   same reasons; to which I replied, "that the convention had not been
   appointed to meet for such a purpose, that we had already been long
   enough detained together, and that their high mightinesses, the States
   General were now waiting for our determination," in that manner, we
   separated from each other, no one attempting any longer to continue the
   conversation, neither did all the members of the convention express a
   joint concurrence in that request, nor employ any kind of persuasion
   with me to prove that such an explanation was in their judgment quite
   equitable. Besides, according to the most correct intelligence which I
   have since gained, some of those who were then present, declared
   afterwards, "that it was a part of the instructions which had been
   previously given to them, not to enter into any conference concerning
   doctrine; and that, if a discussion of that kind had arisen, they must
   have instantly retired from the convention." These several
   circumstances therefore prove that I was very far from being "solicited
   by the whole assembly" to engage in the desired explanation.
     __________________________________________________________________

  8. My reasons for refusing a Conference.

   Most noble and potent Lords, this is a true narration of those
   interviews and conferences which the brethren have solicited, and of my
   continued refusal: from the whole of which, every person may, in my
   opinion, clearly perceive that there is no cause whatever for
   preferring an accusation against me on account of my behaviour
   throughout these transactions; especially when he considers their
   request, with the manner in which it was delivered, and at the same
   time my refusal with the reasons for it; but this is still more obvious
   from my counter-proposal.

   1. Their request, which amounted to a demand upon me for a declaration
   on matters of faith, was not supported by any reasons, as far as I am
   enabled to form a judgment. For I never furnished a cause to any man
   why he should require such a declaration from me rather than from other
   people, by my having taught any thing contrary to the word of God, or
   to the Confession and Catechism of the Belgic Churches. At no period
   have I ceased to make this avowal, and I repeat it on this occasion. I
   am likewise prepared to consent to an inquiry being instituted into
   this my profession, either by a Provincial or a National Synod, that
   the truth of it may by that means, be made yet more apparent--if from
   such an examination it may be thought possible to derive any advantage.

   2. The manner in which their request was delivered, proved of itself to
   be a sufficient obstacle, because it was openly made by a deputation. I
   was also much injured by the way in which the Synod prejudged my cause;
   for we may presume that it would not through its deputies invite any
   man to a conference, unless he had given strong grounds for such an
   interview. For this reason I did not consider myself at liberty to
   consent to a conference of this description, lest I should, by that
   very act, and apparently through a consciousness of guilt, have
   confessed that I had taught something that was wrong or unlawful.

   3. The reasons of my refusal were these:

   First. Because as I am not subject to the jurisdiction either of the
   North Holland Synod or that of South Holland, but have other superiors
   to whom I am bound to render an account of all my concerns, I could not
   consent to a conference with deputies, except by the advice of those
   superiors and at their express command: especially since a conference
   of this kind was not incumbent on me in consequence of the ordinary
   discharge of my duty. It was also not obscurely hinted by the deputies,
   that the conference, [in 1605,] would by no means be a private one; but
   this they discovered in a manner sufficiently intelligible, when they
   refused to enter into a conference with me, divested of their title of
   "deputies." I should, therefore, have failed in obedience to my
   superiors, if I had not rejected a conference which was in this manner
   proposed. I wish the brethren would remember this fact, that although
   every one of our ministers is subject as a member to the jurisdiction
   of the particular Synod to which he belongs, yet not one of them has
   hitherto dared to engage in a conference, without the advice and
   permission of the magistrates under whom he is placed; that no
   particular magistrates have ever allowed any minister within their
   jurisdiction to undertake a conference with the deputies of the
   Churches, unless they had themselves previously granted their consent;
   and that it was frequently their wish, to be present at such
   conference, in the persons of their own deputies. Let it be recollected
   what transpired at Leyden, in the case of Coolhasius [Koolhaes,] at
   Gouda with Herman Herberts, at Horn in the case of Cornelius Wiggeri,
   [Wiggerston,] and at Medenblick in the case of Tako, [Sybrants.]

   The second reason by which I was dissuaded from a conference, is this:
   I perceived that there would be a great inequality in the conference
   which was proposed, when, on the contrary, it is necessary that the
   greatest equality should exist between the parties who are about to
   confer together on any subject. For (l.) they came to me armed with
   public authority; while, with respect to myself, everything partook of
   a private character. And I am not so ignorant in these matters as not
   to perceive the powerful support which that man enjoys who transacts
   any business under the sanction of the public authority. (2.) They were
   themselves three in number, and had with them two deputies of the Synod
   of North Holland. On the other hand, I was alone, and destitute not
   only of all assistance, but also of persons who might act as witnesses
   of the proceedings that were then to have commenced, and to whom they
   as well as myself might have safely entrusted our several causes. (3.)
   They were not persons at their own disposal, but compelled to depend on
   the judgment of their superiors; and they were bound most
   pertinaciously to contend for those religious sentiments, which their
   superiors had within their own minds determined to maintain. To such a
   length was this principle extended, that they were not even left to
   their own discretion--to admit the validity of the argument which I
   might have adduced, however cogent and forcible they might have found
   them to be, and even if they had been altogether unanswerable. From
   these considerations I could not see by what means both parties could
   obtain that mutual advantage, which ought properly to accrue from such
   a conference. I might have gained some beneficial result from it;
   because I was completely at liberty, and, by employing my own
   conscience alone in forming a decision, I could, without prejudice to
   any one, have made those admissions which my conviction of the truth
   might have dictated to me as correct. Of what great importance this
   last circumstance might be, your Lordships would have most fully
   discovered by experience, had any of you been present in the
   Preparatory Convention, as the representatives of your own august body.

   My third reason is, that the account which they would have rendered to
   their superiors after the conference, could not but have operated in
   many ways to my injury, whether I had been absent or present at the
   time when they delivered their report. (1.) Had I been absent, it might
   easily have happened either through the omission or the addition of
   certain words, or through the alteration of others, in regard to their
   sense or order, that some fact or argument would be repeated in a
   manner very different from that in which it really occurred. Such an
   erroneous statement might also have been made, either through the
   inconsiderateness which arises from a defect in the intellect, through
   the weakness of an imperfect memory, or through a prejudice of the
   affections. (2.) And indeed by my presence, I could with difficulty
   have avoided or corrected this inconvenience; because a greater degree
   of credit would have been given to their own deputies, than to me who
   was only a private individual.

   Lastly. By this means I should have conveyed to that assembly, [the
   Provincial Synod,] a right and some kind of prerogative over me; which,
   in reference to me, it does not actually possess; and which,
   consistently with that office whose duties I discharge, it would not be
   possible for me to transfer to the Synod without manifest injustice
   towards those persons under whose jurisdiction it has been the pleasure
   of the general magistracy of the land to place me. Imperious necessity,
   therefore, as well as equity, demanded of me to reject the terms on
   which this conference was offered.

   4. But however strong my sentiments might be on this subject, I gave
   these deputies an opportunity of gaining the information which they
   desired. If it had been their wish to accept the private conference
   which I proposed, they would have become possessed of my sentiments on
   every article of the Christian Faith. Besides, this conference would
   have been much better adapted to promote our mutual edification and
   instruction, than a public one could be; because it is customary in
   private conferences, for each person to speak everything with greater
   familiarity and freedom, than when all the formalities of deputations
   are observed, if I may so express myself. Neither had they the least
   reason to manifest any reluctance on this point; because every one of
   them was at liberty, (if he chose,) to enter into a private conference
   between him and me alone. But when I made this offer to all and to each
   of them, I added as one of my most particular stipulations, that,
   whatever the discussions might be which arose between us, they should
   remain within our bosoms, and no particle of them should be divulged to
   any person living. If on these terms they had consented to hold a
   conference with me, I entertain not the smallest doubt that we should
   either have given each other complete satisfaction: or we should at
   least have made it apparent, that, from our mutual controversy, no
   imminent danger could easily arise, to injure either that truth which
   is necessary to salvation, piety, or Christian peace and amity.

   9. The complaint concerning my refusal to make a declaration of my
   sentiments, does not agree with the rumors concerning me which are in
   general circulation.

   But omitting all further mention of those transactions, I am not able
   entirely to satisfy myself by what contrivance these two complaints
   appear consistent with each other. (1.) That I refuse to make a
   profession of my sentiments; and yet (2.) Invectives are poured forth
   against me, both in foreign countries and at home, as though I am
   attempting to introduce into the Church and into the Christian
   religion, novel, impure and false doctrines. If I do not openly profess
   my sentiments, from what can their injurious tendency be made evident?
   If I do not explain myself, by what method can I be introducing false
   doctrines? If they be mere groundless suspicions that are advanced
   against me, it is uncharitable to grant them entertainment, or at least
   to ascribe to them such great importance.

   But it is cast upon me as a reproach, "that I do certainly disclose a
   few of my opinions, but not all of them; and that, from the few which I
   thus make known, the object at which I aim is no longer obscure, but
   becomes very evident."

   In reference to this censure, the great consideration ought to be, "can
   any of those sentiments which I am said to have disclosed, be proved to
   stand in contradiction either to the word of God, or the Confession of
   the Belgic Churches" (1.) If it be decided, that they are contrary to
   the Confession, then I have been engaged in teaching something in
   opposition to a document, "against which never to propound any
   doctrine," was the faithful promise which I made, when I signed it with
   my own hand. If, therefore, I be found thus criminal, I ought to be
   visited with merited punishment. (2.) But if it can be proved, that any
   of those opinions are contrary to the word of God, then I ought to
   experience a greater degree of blame, and to suffer a severer
   punishment, and compelled either to utter a recantation or to resign my
   office, especially if those heads of doctrine which I have uttered, are
   of such a description as to be notoriously prejudicial to the honour of
   God and the salvation of mankind. (3.) But if those few sentiments
   which I am accused of having advanced, are found neither to be at
   variance with the word of God nor with the Confession, which I have
   just mentioned, then those consequences which are elicited from them,
   or seem dependent on them, cannot possibly be contradictory either to
   the word of God or to the Belgic Confession. For, according to the rule
   of the schoolmen, "if the consectaries or consequences of any doctrine
   be false, it necessarily follows that the doctrine itself is also
   false, and vice versa." The one of these two courses, therefore, ought
   to have been pursued towards me, either to have instituted an action
   against me, or to have given no credit to those rumors. If I might have
   my own choice, the latter course is that which I should have desired;
   but of the former I am not at all afraid. For, how extensively soever
   and in all directions those Thirty-One Articles which concern me have
   been dispersed to my great injury and disparagement, and though they
   have been placed in the hands of several men of great eminence, they
   afford sufficient internal testimony, from the want of sense and of
   other requisites visible in their very composition, that they are
   charged upon me through a total disregard to justice, honour and
   conscience.

   10. The principal reasons why I durst not disclose to the deputies my
   opinions on the subject of Religion.

   But some person will perhaps say: "for the sake of avoiding these
   disturbances, and partly in order by such a measure to give some
   satisfaction to a great number of ministers, you might undoubtedly have
   made to your brethren an open and simple declaration of your sentiments
   on the whole subject of religion, either for the purpose of being
   yourself maturely instructed in more correct principles, or that they
   might have been able in an opportune manner to prepare themselves for a
   mutual conference."

   But I was deterred from adopting that method, on account of three
   inconveniences, of which I was afraid:

   First,. I was afraid that if I had made a profession of my sentiments,
   the consequence would have been, that an inquiry would be instituted on
   the part of others, with regard to the manner in which an action might
   be framed against me from those premises. Secondly. Another cause of my
   fear, was, that such a statement of my opinions would have furnished
   matter for discussion and refutation, in the pulpits of the Churches
   and the scholastic exercises of the Universities. Thirdly. I was also
   afraid, that my opinions would have been transmitted to foreign
   Universities and Churches, in hopes of obtaining from them a sentence
   of condemnation, and the means of oppressing me." That I had very
   weighty reasons to fear every one of these consequences together, it
   would not be difficult for me clearly to demonstrate from the
   Thirty-One Articles, and from the writings of certain individuals.

   With respect to "the personal instruction and edification," which I
   might have hoped to derive from such a disclosure, it is necessary to
   consider, that not only I but many others, and even they themselves,
   have peculiar views which they have formed on religious topics; and,
   therefore, that such instruction cannot be applied to any useful
   purpose, except in some place or other where we may all hereafter
   appear together, and where a definitive sentence, as it is called, both
   may and must be pronounced. With respect to "the opportune and
   benefiting preparation which my brethren ought in the mean time to be
   making for a conference," I declare that it will at that time be most
   seasonable and proper when all shall have produced their views, and
   disclosed them before a whole assembly, that thus an account may be
   taken of them all at once, and they may be considered together.

   Since none of these objections have any existence in this august
   assembly, I proceed to the declaration of my sentiments.

   Having in this manner refuted all those objections which have been made
   against me, I will now endeavour to fulfill my promise, and to execute
   those commands which your Lordships have been pleased to lay upon me. I
   entertain a confident persuasion, that no prejudice will be created
   against me or my sentiments from this act, however imperfectly I may
   perform it, because it has its origin in that obedience which is due
   from me to this noble assembly, next to God, and according to the
   Divine pleasure.
     __________________________________________________________________

I. ON PREDESTINATION

   The first and most important article in religion on which I have to
   offer my views, and which for many years past has engaged my attention,
   is the Predestination of God, that is, the Election of men to
   salvation, and the Reprobation of them to destruction. Commencing with
   this article, I will first explain what is taught concerning it, both
   in discourses and writings, by certain persons in our Churches, and in
   the University of Leyden. I will afterwards declare my own views and
   thoughts on the same subject, while I shew my opinion on what they
   advance.

   On this article there is no uniform and simple opinion among the
   teachers of our Churches; but there is some variation in certain parts
   of it in which they differ from each other.
     __________________________________________________________________

  1. The first opinion, which I reject, but which is espoused by those
  [Supralapsarians] who assume the very highest ground of this Predestination.

   The opinion of those who take the highest ground on this point, as it
   is generally contained in their writings, is to this effect:

   "I. God by an eternal and immutable decree has predestinated, from
   among men, (whom he did not consider as being then created, much less
   as being fallen,) certain individuals to everlasting life, and others
   to eternal destruction, without any regard whatever to righteousness or
   sin, to obedience or disobedience, but purely of his own good pleasure,
   to demonstrate the glory of his justice and mercy; or, (as others
   assert,) to demonstrate his saving grace, wisdom and free
   uncontrollable power.

   "II. In addition to this decree, God has pre-ordained certain
   determinate means which pertain to its execution, and this by an
   eternal and immutable decree. These means necessarily follow by virtue
   of the preceding decree, and necessarily bring him who has been
   predestinated, to the end which has been fore-ordained for him. Some of
   these means belong in common both to the decree of election and that of
   rejection, and others of them are specially restricted to the one
   decree or to the other.

   "III. The means common to both the decrees, are three: the first is,
   the creation of man in the upright [or erect] state of original
   righteousness, or after the image and likeness of God in righteousness
   and true holiness. The second is, the permission of the fall of Adam,
   or the ordination of God that man should sin, and become corrupt or
   vitiated. The third is, the loss or the removal of original
   righteousness and of the image of God, and a being concluded under sin
   and condemnation.

   "IV. For unless God had created some men, he would not have had any
   upon whom he might either bestow eternal life, or superinduce
   everlasting death. Unless he had created them in righteousness and true
   holiness, he would himself have been the author of sin, and would by
   this means have possessed no right either to punish them to the praise
   of his justice, or to save them to the praise of his mercy. Unless they
   had themselves sinned, and by the demerit of sin had rendered
   themselves guilty of death, there would have been no room for the
   demonstration either of justice or of mercy.

   "V. The means pre-ordained for the execution of the decree of election,
   are also these three. The first is, the pre-ordination, or the giving
   of Jesus Christ as a Mediator and a saviour, who might by his meet
   deserve, [or purchase,] for all the elect and for them only, the lost
   righteousness and life, and might communicate them by his own power [Or
   virtue]. The second is, the call [or vocation] to faith outwardly by
   the word, but inwardly by his Spirit, in the mind, affections and will;
   by an operation of such efficacy that the elect person of necessity
   yields assent and obedience to the vocation, in so much that it is not
   possible for him to do otherwise than believe and be obedient to this
   vocation. From hence arise justification and sanctification through the
   blood of Christ and his Spirit, and from them the existence of all good
   works. And all that, manifestly by means of the same force and
   necessity. The third is, that which keeps and preserves the elect in
   faith, holiness, and a zeal for good works; or, it is the gift of
   perseverance; the virtue of which is such, that believing and elect
   persons not only do not sin with a full and entire will, or do not fall
   away totally from faith and grace, but it likewise is neither possible
   for them to sin with a full and perfect will, nor to fall away totally
   or finally from faith and grace.

   "VI. The two last of these means [vocation and perseverance,] belong
   only to the elect who are of adult age. But God employs a shorter way
   to salvation, by which he conducts those children of believers and
   saints who depart out of this life before they arrive at years of
   maturity; that is, provided they belong to the number of the elect,
   (who are known to God alone,) for God bestows on them Christ as their
   saviour, and gives them to Christ, to save them by his blood and Holy
   Spirit, without actual faith and perseverance in it [faith]; and this
   he does according to the promise of the covenant of grace, I will be a
   God unto you, and unto your seed after you.

   "VII. The means pertaining to the execution of the decree of
   reprobation to eternal death, are partly such as peculiarly belong to
   all those who are rejected and reprobate, whether they ever arrive at
   years of maturity or die before that period; and they are partly such
   as are proper only to some of them. The mean that is common to all the
   reprobate, is desertion in sin, by denying to them that saving grace
   which is sufficient and necessary to the salvation of any one. This
   negation [or denial,] consists of two parts. For, in the first place,
   God did not will that Christ should die for them [the reprobate,] or
   become their saviour, and this neither in reference to the antecedent
   will of God, (as some persons call it,) nor in reference to his
   sufficient will, or the value of the price of reconciliation; because
   this price was not offered for reprobates, either with respect to the
   decree of God, or its virtue and efficacy. (1.) But the other part of
   this negation [or denial] is, that God is unwilling to communicate the
   Spirit of Christ to reprobates, yet without such communication they can
   neither be made partakers of Christ nor of his benefits.

   "VIII. The mean which belongs properly only to some of the reprobates,
   is obduration, [or the act of hardening,] which befalls those of them
   who have attained to years of maturity, either because they have very
   frequently and enormously sinned against the law of God, or because
   they have rejected the grace of the gospel. (1.) To the execution of
   the first species of induration, or hardening, belong the illumination
   of their conscience by means of knowledge, and its conviction of the
   righteousness of the law. For it is impossible that this law should not
   necessarily detain them in unrighteousness, to render them inexcusable.
   (2.) For the execution of the second species of induration, God employs
   a call by the preaching of his gospel, which call is inefficacious and
   insufficient both in respect to the decree of God, and to its issue or
   event. This calling is either only an external one, which it is neither
   in their desire nor in their power to obey. Or it is likewise an
   internal one, by which some of them may be excited in their
   understandings to accept and believe the things which they hear; but
   yet it is only with such a faith as that with which the devils are
   endowed when they believe and tremble. Others of them are excited and
   conducted still further, so as to desire in a certain measure to taste
   the heavenly gift. But the latter are, of all others, the most unhappy,
   because they are raised up on high, that they may be brought down with
   a heavier fall. And this fate it is impossible for them to escape, for
   they must of necessity return to their vomit, and depart or fall away
   from the faith. "9.

   "IX. From this decree of Divine election and reprobation, and from this
   administration of the means which pertain to the execution of both of
   them, it follows, that the elect are necessarily saved, it being
   impossible for them to perish--and that the reprobate are necessarily
   damned, it being impossible for them to be saved; and all this from the
   absolute purpose [or determination] of God, which is altogether
   antecedent to all things, and to all those causes which are either in
   things themselves or can possibly result from them."

   These opinions concerning predestination are considered, by some of
   those who advocate them, to be the foundation of Christianity,
   salvation and of its certainty. On these sentiments they suppose, "is
   founded the sure and undoubted consolation of all believers, which is
   capable of rendering their consciences tranquil; and on them also
   depends the praise of the grace of God, so that if any contradiction be
   offered to this doctrine, God is necessarily deprived of the glory of
   his grace, and then the merit of salvation is attributed to the free
   will of man and to his own powers and strength, which ascription
   savours of Pelagianism."

   These then are the causes which are offered why the advocates of these
   sentiments labour with a common anxiety to retain the purity of such a
   doctrine in their churches and why they oppose themselves to all those
   innovations which are at variance with them.
     __________________________________________________________________

  2. MY SENTIMENTS ON THE PRECEDING SCHEME OF PREDESTINATION.

   But, for my own part, to speak my sentiments with freedom, and yet with
   a salvo in favour of a better judgment, I am of opinion, that this
   doctrine of theirs contains many things that are both false and
   impertinent, and at an utter disagreement with each other; all the
   instances of which, the present time will not permit me to recount, but
   I will subject it to an examination only in those parts which are most
   prominent and extensive. I shall, therefore, propose to myself four
   principal heads, which are of the greatest importance in this doctrine;
   and when I have in the first place explained of what kind they are, I
   will afterwards declare more fully the judgment and sentiments which I
   have formed concerning them. They are the following:

   "I. That God has absolutely and precisely decreed to save certain
   particular men by his mercy or grace, but to condemn others by his
   justice: and to do all this without having any regard in such decree to
   righteousness or sin, obedience or disobedience, which could possibly
   exist on the part of one class of men or of the other.

   "II. That, for the execution of the preceding decree, God determined to
   create Adam, and all men in him, in an upright state of original
   righteousness; besides which he also ordained them to commit sin, that
   they might thus become guilty of eternal condemnation and be deprived
   of original righteousness.

   "III. That those persons whom God has thus positively willed to save,
   he has decreed not only to salvation but also to the means which
   pertain to it; (that is, to conduct and bring them to faith in Christ
   Jesus, and to perseverance in that faith ;) and that He also in reality
   leads them to these results by a grace and power that are irresistible,
   so that it is not possible for them to do otherwise than believe,
   persevere in faith, and be saved.

   "IV. That to those whom, by his absolute will, God has fore-ordained to
   perdition, he has also decreed to deny that grace which is necessary
   and sufficient for salvation, and does not in reality confer it upon
   them; so that they are neither placed in a possible condition nor in
   any capacity of believing or of being saved."

   After a diligent contemplation and examination of these four heads, in
   the fear of the Lord, I make the following declaration respecting this
   doctrine of predestination.
     __________________________________________________________________

  3. I REJECT THIS PREDESTINATION FOR THE FOLLOWING REASONS:

   I. Because it is not the foundation of Christianity, of Salvation, or
   of its certainty.

   1. It is not the foundation of Christianity: (1.) For this
   Predestination is not that decree of God by which Christ is appointed
   by God to be the saviour, the Head, and the Foundation of those who
   will be made heirs of salvation. Yet that decree is the only foundation
   of Christianity. (2.) For the doctrine of this Predestination is not
   that doctrine by which, through faith, we as lively stones are built up
   into Christ, the only corner stone, and are inserted into him as the
   members of the body are joined to their head.

   2. It is not the foundation of Salvation: (1.) For this Predestination
   is not that decree of the good pleasure of God in Christ Jesus on which
   alone our salvation rests and depends. (2.) The doctrine of this
   Predestination is not the foundation of Salvation: for it is not "the
   power of God to salvation to every one that believeth :" because
   through it "the righteousness of God" is not "revealed from faith to
   faith."

   3. Nor is it the foundation of the certainty of salvation:

   For that is dependent upon this decree, "they who believe, shall be
   saved :" I believe, therefore, I shall be saved. But the doctrine of
   this Predestination embraces within itself neither the first nor the
   second member of the syllogism.

   This is likewise confessed by some persons in these words:

   "we do not wish to state that the knowledge of this [Predestination] is
   the foundation of Christianity or of salvation, or that it is necessary
   to salvation in the same manner as the doctrine of the Gospel," &c.

   II. This doctrine of Predestination comprises within it neither the
   whole nor any part of the Gospel. For, according to the tenor of the
   discourses delivered by John and Christ, as they are described to us by
   the Evangelist, and according to the doctrine of the Apostles and
   Christ after his ascension, the Gospel consists partly of an injunction
   to repent and believe, and partly of a promise to bestow forgiveness of
   sins, the grace of the Spirit, and life eternal. But this
   Predestination belongs neither to the injunction to repent and believe,
   nor to the annexed promise. Nay, this doctrine does not even teach what
   kind of men in general God has predestinated, which is properly the
   doctrine of the Gospel; but it embraces within itself a certain
   mystery, which is known only to God, who is the Predestinater, and in
   which mystery are comprehended what particular persons and how many he
   has decreed to save and to condemn. From these premises I draw a
   further conclusion, that this doctrine of Predestination is not
   necessary to salvation, either as an object of knowledge, belief, hope,
   or performance. A Confession to this effect has been made by a certain
   learned man, in the theses which he has proposed for discussion on this
   subject, in the following words:

   "Wherefore the gospel cannot be simply termed the book or the
   revelation of Predestination, but only in a relative sense. Because it
   does not absolutely denote either the matter of the number or the form;
   that is, it neither declares how many persons in particular, nor (with
   a few exceptions,) who they are, but only the description of them in
   general, whom God has predestinated."

   III. This doctrine was never admitted, decreed, or approved in any
   Council, either general or particular, for the first six hundred years
   after Christ.

   1. Not in the General Council of Nice, in which sentence was given
   against Arius and in favour of the Deity and Consubstantiality of the
   Son of God. Not in the first Council of Constantinople, in which a
   decree was passed against Macedonius, respecting the Deity of the Holy
   Spirit. Not in the Council of Ephesus, which determined against
   Nestorius, and in favour of the Unity of the Person of the Son of God.
   Not in that of Chalcedon, which condemned Eutyches, and determined,
   "that in one and the same person of our Lord Jesus Christ, there were
   two distinct natures, which differ from each other in their essence."
   Not in the second Council of Constantinople, in which Peter, Bishop of
   Antioch, and Anthymus, Bishop of Constantinople, with certain other
   persons, were condemned for having asserted "that the Father had
   likewise suffered," as well as the Son. Nor in the third Council of
   Constantinople, in which the Monothelites were condemned for having
   asserted "that there was only one will and operation in Jesus Christ."

   2. But this doctrine was not discussed or confirmed in particular
   Councils, such as that of Jerusalem, Orange, or even that of Mela in
   Africa, which was held against Pelagius and his errors, as is apparent
   from the articles of doctrine which were then decreed both against his
   person and his false opinions.

   But so far was Augustine's doctrine of Predestination from being
   received in those councils, that when Celestinus, the Bishop of Rome,
   who was his contemporary, wrote to the Bishops of France, and condemned
   the doctrines of the Pelagians, he concluded his epistle in these
   words: "but as we dare not despise, so neither do we deem it necessary
   to defend the more profound and difficult parts of the questions which
   occur in this controversy, and which have been treated to a very great
   extent by those who opposed the heretics. Because we believe, that
   whatever the writings according to the forementioned rules of the
   Apostolic See have taught us, is amply sufficient for confessing the
   grace of God, from whose work, credit and authority not a little must
   be subtracted or withdrawn," &c. In reference to the rules which were
   laid down by Celestinus in that epistle, and which had been decreed in
   the three preceding particular Councils, we shall experience no
   difficulty in agreeing together about them, especially in regard to
   those matters which are necessary to the establishment of grace in
   opposition to Pelagius and his errors.

   IV. None of those Doctors or Divines of the Church who held correct and
   orthodox sentiments for the first six hundred years after the birth of
   Christ, ever brought this doctrine forward or gave it their approval.
   Neither was it professed and approved by a single individual of those
   who shewed themselves the principal and keenest defenders of grace
   against Pelagius. Of this description, it is evident, were St. Jerome,
   Augustine, the author of the treatise entitled, De Vocatione Gentium,
   ["The calling of the Gentiles,"] Prosper of Aquitaine, Hilary,
   Fulgentius, and Orosius. This is very apparent from their writings.

   V. It neither agrees nor corresponds with the Harmony of those
   confessions which were printed and published together in one volume at
   Geneva, in the name of the Reformed and Protestant Churches. If that
   harmony of Confessions be faithfully consulted, it will appear that
   many of them do not speak in the same manner concerning Predestination;
   that some of them only incidentally mention it; and that they evidently
   never once touch upon those heads of the doctrine, which are now in
   great repute and particularly urged in the preceding scheme of
   Predestination, and which I have already adduced. Nor does any single
   Confession deliver this doctrine in the same manner as it has just now
   been propounded by me. The Confessions of Bohemia, England and
   Wirtemburgh, and the first Helvetian [Swiss] Confession, and that of
   the four cities of Strasburgh, Constance, Memmingen, and Lindau, make
   no mention of this Predestination. Those of Basle and Saxony, only take
   a very cursory notice of it in three words. The Augustan Confession
   speaks of it in such a manner as to induce the Genevan editors to
   think, that some annotation was necessary on their part, to give us a
   previous warning. The last of the Helvetian [Swiss] Confessions, to
   which a great portion of the Reformed Churches have expressed their
   assent and which they have subscribed, likewise speaks of it in such a
   strain as makes me very desirous to see what method can possibly be
   adopted to give it any accordance with that doctrine of Predestination
   which I have just now advanced. Yet this [Swiss] Confession is that
   which has obtained the approbation of the Churches of Geneva and Savoy.

   VI. Without the least contention or caviling, it may very properly be
   made a question of doubt, whether this doctrine agrees with the Belgic
   Confession and the Heidelberg Catechism; as I shall briefly
   demonstrate.

   1. In the 14th Article of the Dutch Confession, these expressions
   occur: "Man knowingly and willingly subjected himself to sin, and,
   consequently, to death and cursing, while he lent an ear to the
   deceiving words and impostures of the devil," &c. From this sentence I
   conclude, that man did not sin on account of any necessity through a
   preceding decree of Predestination: which inference is diametrically
   opposed to that doctrine of Predestination against which I now contend.
   Then, in the 16th Article, which treats of the eternal election of God,
   these words are contained: "God shewed himself Merciful, by delivering
   from damnation, and by saving, those persons whom, in his eternal and
   immutable counsel and cording to his gratuitous goodness, he chose in
   Christ Jesus our Lord, without any regard to their works. And he shewed
   himself just, in leaving others in that their fall and perdition into
   which they had precipitated themselves." It is not obvious to me, how
   these words are consistent with this doctrine of Predestination.

   2. In the 20th question of the Heidelberg Catechism, we read:

   "salvation through Christ is not given [restored] to all them who had
   perished in Adam, but to those only who are engrafted into Christ by
   the faith, and who embrace his benefits." From this sentence I infer,
   that God has not absolutely Predestinated any men to salvation; but
   that he has in his decree considered [or looked upon] them as
   believers. This deduction is at open conflict with the first and third
   points of this Predestination. In the 54th question of the same
   Catechism, it is said: "I believe that, from the beginning to the end
   of the world, the Son of God out of the entire race of mankind doth by
   his word and Spirit gather or collect unto himself a company chosen
   unto eternal life and agreeing together in the true faith." In this
   sentence "election to eternal life," and "agreement in the faith,"
   stand in mutual juxtaposition; and in such a manner, that the latter is
   not rendered subordinate to the former, which, according to these
   sentiments on Predestination ought to have been done. In that case the
   words should have been placed in the following order: "the son of God
   calls and gathers to himself, by his word and Spirit, a company chosen
   to eternal life, that they may believe and agree together in the true
   faith."

   Since such are the statements of our Confession and Catechism, no
   reason whatever exists, why those who embrace and defend these
   sentiments on Predestination, should either violently endeavour to
   obtrude them on their colleagues and on the Church of Christ; or why
   they should take it amiss, and put the worst construction upon it, when
   any thing is taught in the Church or University that is not exactly
   accordant with their doctrine, or that is opposed to it.

   VII. I affirm, that this doctrine is repugnant to the Nature of God,
   but particularly to those Attributes of his nature by which he performs
   and manages all things, his wisdom, justice, and goodness.

   1. It is repugnant to his wisdom in three ways. (1.) Because it
   represents God as decreeing something for a particular end [or purpose]
   which neither is nor can be good: which is, that God created something
   for eternal perdition to the praise of his justice. (2.) Because it
   states, that the object which God proposed to himself by this
   Predestination, was, to demonstrate the glory of his mercy and justice:
   But this glory he cannot demonstrate, except by an act that is contrary
   at once to his mercy and his justice, of which description is that
   decree of God in which he determined that man should sin and be
   rendered miserable. (3.) Because it changes and inverts the order of
   the two-fold wisdom of God, as it is displayed to us in the Scriptures.
   For it asserts, that God has absolutely predetermined to save men by
   the mercy and wisdom that are comprehended in the doctrine of the cross
   of Christ, without having foreseen this circumstance, that it was
   impossible for man (and that, truly, through his own fault,) to be
   saved by the wisdom which was revealed in the law and which was infused
   into him at the period of his creation: When the scripture asserts, on
   the contrary, that "it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to
   save them that believe;" that is, "by the doctrine of the cross, after
   that in the wisdom of God the world by wisdom knew not God." (1 Cor. i.
   21.)

   2. It is repugnant to the justice of God, not only in reference to that
   attribute denoting in God a love of righteousness and a hatred of
   iniquity, but also in reference to its being a perpetual and constant
   desire in him to render to every one that which is his due. (1.) It is
   at variance with the first of these ideas of justice in the following
   manner: Because it affirms, that God has absolutely willed to save
   certain individual men, and has decreed their salvation without having
   the least regard to righteousness or obedience: The proper inference
   from which, is, that God loves such men far more than his own justice
   [or righteousness.] (2.) It is opposed to the second idea of his
   justice: Because it affirms, that God wishes to subject his creature to
   misery, (which cannot possibly have any existence except as the
   punishment of sin,) although, at the same time, he does not look upon
   [or consider] the creature as a sinner, and therefore as not obnoxious
   either to wrath or to punishment. This is the manner in which it lays
   down the position, that God has willed to give to the creature not only
   something which does not belong to it, but which is connected with its
   greatest injury. Which is another act directly opposed to his justice.
   In accordance, therefore, with this doctrine, God, in the first place,
   detracts from himself that which is his own, [or his right,] and then
   imparts to the creature what does not belong to it, to its great misery
   and unhappiness.

   3. It is also repugnant to the Goodness of God. Goodness is an
   affection [or disposition] in God to communicate his own good so far as
   his justice considers and admits to be fitting and proper. But in this
   doctrine the following act is attributed to God, that, of himself, and
   induced to it by nothing external, he wills the greatest evil to his
   creatures; and that from all eternity he has pre-ordained that evil for
   them, or pre-determined to impart it to them, even before he resolved
   to bestow upon them any portion of good. For this doctrine states, that
   God willed to damn; and, that he might be able to do this, be willed to
   create; although creation is the first egress [or going forth] of God's
   goodness towards his creatures. How vastly different are such
   statements as these from that expansive goodness of God by which he
   confers benefits not only on the unworthy, but also on the evil, the
   unjust and on those who are deserving of punishment, which trait of
   Divine beneficence in our Father who is in heaven, we are commanded to
   imitate. (Matt. v. 45.)

   VIII. Such a doctrine of Predestination is contrary to the nature of
   man, in regard to his having been created after the Divine image in the
   knowledge of God and in righteousness, in regard to his having been
   created with freedom of will, and in regard to his having been created
   with a disposition and aptitude for the enjoyment of life eternal.
   These three circumstance, respecting him, may be deduced from the
   following brief expressions: "Do this, and live :" (Rom. x, 5) "In the
   day that thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely die." (Gen. ii. 17.) If
   man be deprived of any of these qualifications, such admonitions as
   these cannot possibly be effective in exciting him to obedience.

   1. This doctrine is inconsistent with the Divine image, which consists
   of the knowledge of God and holiness. For according to this knowledge
   and righteousness man was qualified and empowered, he was also laid
   under an obligation to know God, to love, worship, and serve him. But
   by the intervention, or rather by the prevention, of this
   Predestination, it was pre-ordained that man should be formed vicious
   and should commit sin, that is, that he should neither know God, love,
   worship, nor serve him; and that he should not perform that which by
   the image of God, he was well qualified and empowered to do, and which
   he was bound to perform. This is tantamount to such a declaration as
   the following, which any one might make:

   "God did undoubtedly create man after his own image, in righteousness
   and true holiness; but, notwithstanding this, he fore-ordained and
   decreed, that man should become impure and unrighteous, that is, should
   be made conformable to the image of Satan."

   2. This doctrine is inconsistent with the freedom of the will, in which
   and with which man was created by God. For it prevents the exercise of
   this liberty, by binding or determining the will absolutely to one
   object, that is, to do this thing precisely, or to do that. God,
   therefore, according to this statement, may be blamed for the one or
   the other of these two things, (with which let no man charge his
   Maker!) either for creating man with freedom of will, or for hindering
   him in the use of his own liberty after he had formed him a free agent.
   In the former of these two cases, God is chargeable with a want of
   consideration, in the latter with mutability. And in both, with being
   injurious to man as well as to himself.

   3. This Predestination is prejudicial to man in regard to the
   inclination and capacity for the eternal fruition of salvation, with
   which he was endowed at the period of his creation. For, since by this
   Predestination it has been pre-determined, that the greater part of
   mankind shall not be made partakers of salvation, but shall fall into
   everlasting condemnation, and since this predetermination took place
   even before the decree had passed for creating man, such persons are
   deprived of something, for the desire of which they have been endowed
   by God with a natural inclination. This great privation they suffer,
   not in consequence of any preceding sin or demerit of their own, but
   simply and solely through this sort of Predestination.

   IX. This Predestination is diametrically opposed to the Act of
   Creation.

   1. For creation is a communication of good according to the intrinsic
   property of its nature. But, creation of this description, whose intent
   or design is, to make a way through itself by which the reprobation
   that had been previously determined may obtain its object, is not a
   communication of good. For we ought to form our estimate and judgment
   of every good, from the mind and intention of Him who is the Donor, and
   from the end to which or on account of which it is bestowed. In the
   present instance, the intention of the Donor would have been, to
   condemn, which is an act that could not possibly affect any one except
   a creature; and the end or event of creation would have been the
   eternal perdition of the creature. In that case creation would not have
   been a communication of any good, but a preparation for the greatest
   evil both according to the very intention of the Creator and the actual
   issue of the matter; and according to the words of Christ, "it had seen
   good for that man, if he had never been born!" (Matt. xxvi. 24.)

   2. Reprobation is an act of hatred, and from hatred derives its origin.
   But creation does not proceed from hatred; it is not therefore a way or
   means, which belongs to the execution of the decree of reprobation.

   3. Creation is a perfect act of God, by which he has manifested his
   wisdom, goodness and omnipotence: It is not therefore subordinate to
   the end of any other preceding work or action of God. But it is rather
   to be viewed as that act of God, which necessarily precedes and is
   antecedent to all other acts that he can possibly either decree or
   undertake. Unless God had formed a previous conception of the work of
   creation, he could not have decreed actually to undertake any other
   act; and until he had executed the work of creation, he could by no
   means have completed any other operation.

   4. All the actions of God which tend to the condemnation of his
   creatures, are strange work or foreign to him; because God consents to
   them, for some other cause that is quite extraneous. But creation is
   not an action that is foreign to God, but it is proper to him. It is
   eminently an action most appropriate to Him, and to which he could be
   moved by no other external cause, because it is the very first of the
   Divine acts, and, till it was done, nothing could have any actual
   existence, except God himself; for every thing else that has a being,
   came into existence through this action.

   5. If creation be the way and means through which God willed the
   execution of the decree of his reprobation, he was more inclined to
   will the act of reprobation than that of creation; and he consequently
   derived greater satisfaction from the act of condemning certain of his
   innocent creatures, than in the act of their creation.

   6. Lastly. Creation cannot be a way or means of reprobation according
   to the absolute purpose of God: because, after the creation was
   completed, it was in the power of man still to have remained obedient
   to the divine commands, and not to commit sin; to render this possible,
   while God had on one part bestowed on him sufficient strength and
   power, he had also on the other placed sufficient impediments; a
   circumstance most diametrically opposed to a Predestination of this
   description.

   X. This doctrine is at open hostility with the Nature of Eternal Life,
   and the titles by which it is signally distinguished in the Scriptures.
   For it is called "the inheritance of the sons of God ;" (Tit. iii. 7,)
   but those alone are the sons of God, according to the doctrine of the
   Gospel, "who believe in the name of Jesus Christ." (John i. 12.) It is
   also called, "the reward of obedience," (Matt. v. 12,) and of "the
   labour of love;" (Heb. vi. 10,) "the recompense of those who fight the
   good fight and who run well, a crown of righteousness," &c. (Rev. ii.
   10; 2 Tim. iv. 7, 8.) God therefore has not, from his own absolute
   decree, without any consideration or regard whatever to faith and
   obedience, appointed to any man, or determined to appoint to him, life
   eternal.

   XI This Predestination is also opposed to the Nature of Eternal Death,
   and to those appellations by which it is described in Scripture. For it
   is called "the wages of sin; (Rom. vi. 23,) the punishment of
   everlasting destruction, which shall be recompensed to them that know
   not God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; (2
   Thess. i. 8, 9,) the everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his
   angels, (Matt. xxv. 41,) a fire which shall devour the enemies and
   adversaries of God." (Heb. x. 27.) God, therefore, has not, by any
   absolute decree without respect to sin and disobedience, prepared
   eternal death for any person.

   XII This Predestination is inconsistent with the Nature and Properties
   of Sin in two ways: (1.) Because sin is called "disobedience" and
   "rebellion," neither of which terms can possibly apply to any person
   who by a preceding divine decree is placed under an unavoidable
   necessity of sinning. (2.) Because sin is the meritorious cause of
   damnation. But the meritorious cause which moves the Divine will to
   reprobate, is according to justice; and it induces God, who holds sin
   in abhorrence, to will reprobation. Sin, therefore, which is a cause,
   cannot be placed among the means, by which God executes the decree or
   will of reprobation.

   XIII. This doctrine is likewise repugnant to the Nature of Divine
   Grace, and as far as its powers permit, it effects its destruction.
   Under whatever specious pretenses it may be asserted, that "this kind
   of Predestination is most admirably adapted and quite necessary for the
   establishment of grace," yet it destroys it in three ways:

   1. Because grace is so attempered and commingled with the nature of
   man, as not to destroy within him the liberty of his will, but to give
   it a right direction, to correct its depravity, and to allow man to
   possess his own proper notions. While, on the contrary, this
   Predestination introduces such a species of grace, as takes away free
   will and hinders its exercise.

   2. Because the representations of grace which the scriptures contain,
   are such as describe it capable of "being resisted, (Acts vii. 51,) and
   received in vain;" (2 Cor. vi. 1,) and that it is possible for man to
   avoid yielding his assent to it; and to refuse all co-operation with
   it. (Heb. xii. 15; Matt. xxiii. 37; Luke vii. 30.) While, on the
   contrary, this Predestination affirms, that grace is a certain
   irresistible force and operation.

   3. Because, according to the primary intention and chief design of God,
   grace conduces to the good of those persons to whom it is offered and
   by whom it is received: while, on the contrary, this doctrine drags
   along with it the assertion, that grace is offered even to certain
   reprobates, and is so far communicated to them as to illuminate their
   understandings and to excite within them a taste for the heavenly
   gifts, only for this end and purpose, that, in proportion to the height
   to which they are elevated, the abyss into which they are precipitated
   may be the deeper, and their fall the heavier; and that they may both
   merit and receive the greater perdition.

   XIV. The doctrine of this Predestination is Injurious to the Glory of
   God, which does not consist of a declaration of liberty or authority,
   nor of a demonstration of anger and power, except to such an extent as
   that declaration and demonstration may be consistent with justice, and
   with a perpetual reservation in behalf of the honour of God's goodness.
   But, according to this doctrine, it follows that God is the author of
   sin, which may be proved by four arguments:

   1. One of its positions is, that God has absolutely decreed to
   demonstrate his glory by punitive justice and mercy, in the salvation
   of some men, and in the damnation of others, which neither was done,
   nor could have possibly been done, unless sin had entered into the
   world.

   2. This doctrine affirms, that, in order to obtain his object, God
   ordained that man should commit sin, and be rendered vitiated; and,
   from this Divine ordination or appointment, the fall of man necessarily
   followed.

   3. It asserts that God has denied to man, or has withdrawn from him,
   such a portion of grace as is sufficient and necessary to enable him to
   avoid sin, and that this was done before man had sinned: which is an
   act that amounts to the same as if God had prescribed a law to man,
   which it would be utterly impossible for him to fulfill, when the
   nature in which he had been created was taken into consideration.

   4. It ascribes to God certain operations with regard to man, both
   external and internal, both mediate (by means of the intervention of
   other creatures) and immediate--which Divine operations being once
   admitted, man must necessarily commit sin, by that necessity which the
   schoolmen call "a consequential necessity antecedent to the thing
   itself," and which totally destroys the freedom of the will. Such an
   act does this doctrine attribute to God, and represents it to proceed
   from his primary and chief intention, without any foreknowledge of an
   inclination, will, or action on the part of man.

   From these premises, we deduce, as a further conclusion, that God
   really sins. Because, according to this doctrine, he moves to sin by an
   act that is unavoidable, and according to his own purpose and primary
   intention, without having received any previous inducement to such an
   act from any preceding sin or demerit in man.

   From the same position we might also infer, that God is the only
   sinner. For man, who is impelled by an irresistible force to commit
   sin, (that is, to perpetrate some deed that has been prohibited,)
   cannot be said to sin himself.

   As a legitimate consequence it also follows, that sin is not sin, since
   whatever that be which God does, it neither can be sin, nor ought any
   of his acts to receive that appellation.

   Besides the instances which I have already recounted, there is another
   method by which this doctrine inflicts a deep wound on the honour of
   God--but these, it is probable, will be considered at present to be
   amply sufficient.

   XV. This doctrine is highly dishonourable to Jesus Christ our saviour.
   For, 1. It entirely excludes him from that decree of Predestination
   which predestinates the end: and it affirms, that men were
   predestinated to be saved, before Christ was predestinated to save
   them; and thus it argues, that he is not the foundation of election. 2.
   It denies, that Christ is the meritorious cause, that again obtained
   for us the salvation which we had lost, by placing him as only a
   subordinate cause of that salvation which had been already
   foreordained, and thus only a minister and instrument to apply that
   salvation unto us. This indeed is in evident congruity with the opinion
   which states "that God has absolutely willed the salvation of certain
   men, by the first and supreme decree which he passed, and on which all
   his other decrees depend and are consequent." If this be true, it was
   therefore impossible for the salvation of such men to have been lost,
   and therefore unnecessary for it to be repaired and in some sort
   regained afresh, and discovered, by the merit of Christ, who was
   fore-ordained a saviour for them alone.

   XVI. This doctrine is also hurtful to the salvation of men.

   1. Because it prevents that saving and godly sorrow for sins that have
   been committed, which cannot exist in those who have no consciousness
   of sin. But it is obvious, that the man who has committed sin through
   the unavoidable necessity of the decree of God, cannot possibly have
   this kind of consciousness of sin. (2 Cor. vii. 10.)

   2. Because it removes all pious solicitude about being converted from
   sin unto God. For he can feel no such concern who is entirely passive
   and conducts himself like a dead man, with respect not only to his
   discernment and perception of the grace of God that is exciting and
   assisting, but also to his assent and obedience to it; and who is
   converted by such an irresistible impulse, that he not only cannot
   avoid being sensible of the grace of God which knocks within him, but
   he must likewise of necessity yield his assent to it, and thus convert
   himself, or rather be converted. Such a person it is evident, cannot
   produce within his heart or conceive in his mind this solicitude,
   except he have previously felt the same irresistible motion. And if he
   should produce within his heart any such concern, it would be in vain
   and without the least advantage. For that cannot be a true solicitude,
   which is not produced in the heart by any other means except by an
   irresistible force according to the absolute purpose and intention of
   God to effect his salvation. (Rev. ii. 3; iii, 2.)

   3. Because it restrains, in persons that are converted, all zeal and
   studious regard for good works, since it declares "that the regenerate
   cannot perform either more or less good than they do." For he that is
   actuated or impelled by saving grace, must work, and cannot discontinue
   his labour; but he that is not actuated by the same grace, can do
   nothing, and finds it necessary to cease from all attempts. (Tit. iii.
   14.)

   4. Because it extinguishes the zeal for prayer, which yet is an
   efficacious means instituted by God for asking and obtaining all kinds
   of blessings from him, but principally the great one of salvation.
   (Luke xi. 1-13.) But from the circumstance of it having been before
   determined by an immutable and inevitable decree, that this description
   of men [the elect] should obtain salvation, prayer cannot on any
   account be a means for asking and obtaining that salvation. It can only
   be a mode of worshipping God; because according to the absolute decree
   of his Predestination he has determined that such men shall be saved.

   5. It takes away all that most salutary fear and trembling with which
   we are commanded to work out our own salvation. (Phil. ii. 12) for it
   states "that he who is elected and believes, cannot sin with that full
   and entire willingness with which sin is committed by the ungodly; and
   that they cannot either totally or finally fall away from faith or
   grace."

   6. Because it produces within men a despair both of performing that
   which their duty requires and of obtaining that towards which their
   desires are directed. For when they are taught that the grace of God
   (which is really necessary to the performance of the least portion of
   good) is denied to the majority of mankind, according to an absolute
   and peremptory decree of God -- - and that such grace is denied
   because, by a preceding decree equally absolute, God has determined not
   to confer salvation on them but damnation; when they are thus taught,
   it is scarcely possible for any other result to ensue, than that the
   individual who cannot even with great difficulty work a persuasion
   within himself of his being elected, should soon consider himself
   included in the number of the reprobate. From such an apprehension as
   this, must arise a certain despair of performing righteousness and
   obtaining salvation.

   XVII. This doctrine inverts the order of the Gospel of Jesus

   Christ. For in the Gospel God requires repentance and faith on the part
   of man, by promising to him life everlasting, if he consent to become a
   convert and a believer. (Mark i. 15; xvi, 16.) But it is stated in this
   [Supralapsarian] decree of Predestination, that it is God's absolute
   will, to bestow salvation on certain particular men, and that he willed
   at the same time absolutely to give those very individuals repentance
   and faith, by means of an irresistible force, because it was his will
   and pleasure to save them. In the Gospel, God denounces eternal death
   on the impenitent and unbelieving. (John iii. 36.) And those threats
   contribute to the purpose which he has in view, that he may by such
   means deter them from unbelief and thus may save them. But by this
   decree of Predestination it is taught, that God wills not to confer on
   certain individual men that grace which is necessary for conversion and
   faith because he has absolutely decreed their condemnation.

   The Gospel says, "God so loved the world that he gave his only-begotten
   son, that whosoever believeth in him should have everlasting life."
   (John iii. 16.)

   But this doctrine declares; "that God so loved those whom he had
   absolutely elected to eternal life, as to give his son to them alone,
   and by an irresistible force to produce within them faith on him." To
   embrace the whole in few words, the Gospel says, "fulfill the command,
   and thou shalt obtain the promise; believe, and thou shalt live." But
   this [supralapsarian] doctrine says, "since it is my will to give thee
   life, it is therefore my will to give thee faith:" which is a real and
   most manifest inversion of the Gospel.

   XVIII. This Predestination is in open hostility to the ministry of the
   Gospel.

   1. For if God by an irresistible power quicken him who is dead in
   trespasses and sins, no man can be a minister and "a labourer together
   with God," (1 Cor. iii. 9,) nor can the word preached by man be the
   instrument of grace and of the Spirit, any more than a creature could
   have been an instrument of grace in the first creation, or a dispenser
   of that grace in the resurrection of the body from the dead.

   2. Because by this Predestination the ministry of the gospel is made
   "the savour of death unto death" in the case of the majority of those
   who hear it, (2 Cor. ii. 14-16,) as well as an instrument of
   condemnation, according to the primary design and absolute intention of
   God, without any consideration of previous rebellion.

   3. Because, according to this doctrine, baptism, when administered to
   many reprobate children, (who yet are the offspring of parents that
   believe and are God's covenant people,) is evidently a seal [or
   ratification] of nothing, and thus becomes entirely useless, in
   accordance with the primary and absolute intention of God, without any
   fault [or culpability] on the part of the infants themselves, to whom
   it is administered in obedience to the Divine command.

   4. Because it hinders public prayers from being offered to God in a
   becoming and suitable manner, that is, with faith, and in confidence
   that they will be profitable to all the hearers of the word; when there
   are many among them, whom God is not only unwilling to save, but whom
   by his absolute, eternal, and immutable will, (which is antecedent to
   all things and causes whatever,) it is his will and pleasure to damn:
   In the mean time, when the apostle commands prayers and supplications
   to be made for all men, he adds this reason, "for this is good and
   acceptable in the sight of God our saviour; who will have all men to be
   saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth." (1 Tim. ii. 1-4.)

   5. The constitution of this doctrine is such, as very easily to render
   pastors and teachers slothful and negligent in the exercise of their
   ministry: Because, from this doctrine it appears to them as though it
   were impossible for all their diligence to be useful to any persons,
   except to those only whom God absolutely and precisely wills to save,
   and who cannot possibly perish; and as though all their negligence
   could be hurtful to none, except to those alone whom God absolutely
   wills to destroy, who must of necessity perish, and to whom a contrary
   fate is impossible.

   XIX. This doctrine completely subverts the foundation of religion in
   general, and of the Christian Religion in particular.

   1. The foundation of religion considered in general, is a two-fold love
   of God; without which there neither is nor can be any religion: The
   first of them is a love for righteousness [or justice] which gives
   existence to his hatred of sin. The second is a love for the creature
   who is endowed with reason, and (in the matter now before us,) it is a
   love for man, according to the expression of the Apostle to the
   Hebrews. "for he that cometh to God must believe that he is, and that
   he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek Him." (xi, 6.) God's love
   of righteousness is manifested by this circumstance, that it is not his
   will and pleasure to bestow eternal life on any except on "those who
   seek him." God's love of man consists in his being willing to give him
   eternal life, if he seek Him.

   A mutual relation subsists between these two kinds of love, which is
   this. The latter species of love, which extends itself to the
   creatures, cannot come into exercise, except so far as it is permitted
   by the former, [the love of righteousness]: The former love, therefore,
   is by far the most excellent species; but in every direction there is
   abundant scope for the emanations of the latter, [the love of the
   creature,] except where the former [the love of righteousness] has
   placed some impediment in the range of its exercise. The first of these
   consequences is most evidently proved from the circumstance of God's
   condemning man on account of sin, although he loves him in the relation
   in which he stands as his creature; which would by no means have been
   done, had he loved man more than righteousness, [or justice,] and had
   he evinced a stronger aversion to the eternal misery of man than to his
   disobedience. But the second consequence is proved by this argument,
   that God condemns no person, except on account of sin; and that he
   saves such a multitude of men who turn themselves away [or are
   converted] from sin; which he could not do, unless it was his will to
   allow as abundant scope to his love for the creatures, as is permitted
   by righteousness [or justice] under the regulation of the Divine
   judgment.

   But this [Supralapsarian] doctrine inverts this order and mutual
   relation in two ways: (1.) The one is when it states, that God wills
   absolutely to save certain particular men, without having had in that
   his intention the least reference or regard to their obedience. This is
   the manner in which it places the love of God to man before his love of
   righteousness, and lays down the position--that God loves men (as such)
   more than righteousness, and evinces a stronger aversion to their
   misery than to their sin and disobedience. (2.) The other is when it
   asserts, on the contrary, that God wills absolutely to damn certain
   particular men without manifesting in his decree any consideration of
   their disobedience. In this manner it detracts from his love to the
   creature that which belongs to it; while it teaches, that God hates the
   creature, without any cause or necessity derived from his love of
   righteousness and his hatred of iniquity. In which case, it is not
   true, "that sin is the primary object of God's hatred, and its only
   meritorious cause."

   The great influence and potency which this consideration possesses in
   subverting the foundation of religion, may be appropriately described
   by the following simile: Suppose a son to say, "My father is such a
   great lover of righteousness and equity, that, notwithstanding I am his
   beloved son, he would disinherit me if I were found disobedient to him.
   Obedience, therefore, is a duty which I must sedulously cultivate, and
   which is highly incumbent upon me, if I wish to be his heir." Suppose
   another son to say: "My father's love for me is so great, that he is
   absolutely resolved to make me his heir. There is, therefore, no
   necessity for my earnestly striving to yield him obedience; for,
   according to his unchangeable will, I shall become his heir. Nay, he
   will by an irresistible force draw me to obey him, rather than not
   suffer me to be made his heir." But such reasoning as the latter is
   diametrically opposed to the doctrine contained in the following words
   of John the Baptist: "And think not to say within yourselves, we have
   Abraham to our father: For I say unto you, that God is able of these
   stones to raise up children unto Abraham." (Matt. iii. 9.)

   2. But the Christian religion also has its superstructure built upon
   this two-fold love as a foundation. This love, however, is to be
   considered in a manner somewhat different, in consequence of the change
   in the condition of man, who, when he had been created after the image
   of God and in his favour, became by his own fault a sinner and an enemy
   to God. (1.) God's love of righteousness [or justice] on which the
   Christian religion rests, is, first, that righteousness which he
   declared only once, which was in Christ; because it was his will that
   sin should not be expiated in any other way than by the blood and death
   of his Son, and that Christ should not be admitted before him as an
   Advocate, Deprecator and Intercessor, except when sprinkled by his own
   blood. But this love of righteousness is, secondly, that which he daily
   manifests in the preaching of the gospel, in which he declares it to be
   his will to grant a communication of Christ and his benefits to no man,
   except to him who becomes converted and believes in Christ. (2.) God's
   love of miserable sinners, on which likewise the Christian religion is
   founded, is, first, that love by which he gave his Son for them, and
   constituted him a saviour of those who obey him. But this love of
   sinners is, secondly, that by which he hath required obedience, not
   according to the rigor and severity to which he was entitled by his own
   supreme right, but according to his grace and clemency, and with the
   addition of a promise of the remission of sins, provided fallen man
   repent.

   The [supralapsarian] doctrine of Predestination is, in two ways,
   opposed to this two-fold foundation: first, by stating, "that God has
   such a great love for certain sinners, that it was his will absolutely
   to save them before he had given satisfaction, through Christ Jesus, to
   his love of righteousness, [or justice,] and that he thus willed their
   salvation even in his own fore-knowledge and according to his
   determinate purpose." Besides, it totally and most completely overturns
   this foundation, by teaching it to be "God's pleasure, that
   satisfaction should be paid to his justice, [or righteousness,] because
   he willed absolutely to save such persons:" which is nothing less, than
   to make his love for justice, manifested in Christ, subordinate to his
   love for sinful man whom it is his will absolutely to save. Secondly.
   It opposes itself to this foundation, by teaching, "that it is the will
   of God absolutely to damn certain sinners without any consideration of
   their impenitency;" when at the same time a most plenary and complete
   satisfaction had been rendered, in Christ Jesus, to God's love of
   righteousness [or justice] and to his hatred of sin. So that nothing
   now can hinder the possibility of his extending mercy to the sinner,
   whosoever he may be, except the condition of repentance. Unless some
   person should choose to assert, what is stated in this doctrine, "that
   it has been God's will to act towards the greater part of mankind with
   the same severity as he exercised towards the devil and his angels, or
   even with greater, since it was his pleasure that neither Christ nor
   his gospel should be productive of greater blessings to them than to
   the devils, and since, according to the first offense, the door of
   grace is as much closed against them as it is against the evil angels."
   Yet each of those angels sinned, by himself in his own proper person,
   through his individual maliciousness, and by his voluntary act; while
   men sinned, only in Adam their parent, before they had been brought
   into existence.

   But, that we may more clearly understand the fact of this two-fold love
   being the foundation of all religion and the manner in which it is so,
   with the mutual correspondence that subsists between each other, as we
   have already described them, it will be profitable for us to
   contemplate with greater attention the following words of the Apostle
   to the Hebrews: "He that cometh to God, must believe that He is and
   that He is a rewarder of them that diligently seek Him." In these words
   two things are laid down as foundations to religion, in opposition to
   two fiery darts of Satan, which are the most pernicious pests to it,
   and each of which is able by itself to overturn and extirpate all
   religion. One of them is security, the other despair. Security
   operates, when a man permits himself, that, how inattentive soever he
   may be to the worship of God, he will not be damned, but will obtain
   salvation. Despair is in operation, when a person entertains a
   persuasion, that, whatever degree of reverence he may evince towards
   God, he will not receive any remuneration. In what human mind soever
   either of these pests is fostered, it is impossible that any true and
   proper worship of God can there reside. Now both of them are overturned
   by the words of the Apostle: For if a man firmly believes, "that God
   will bestow eternal life on those alone who seek Him, but that He will
   inflict on the rest death eternal," he can on no account indulge
   himself in security. And if he likewise believes, that "God is truly a
   rewarder of those who diligently seek Him," by applying himself to the
   search he will not be in danger of falling into despair. The foundation
   of the former kind of faith by which a man firmly believes, "that God
   will bestow eternal life on none except on those who seek Him," is that
   love which God bears to his own righteousness, [or justice,] and which
   is greater than that which he entertains for man. And, by this alone,
   all cause of security is removed. But the foundation of the latter kind
   of faith, "that God will undoubtedly be a rewarder of those who
   diligently seek Him," is that great love for man which neither will nor
   can prevent God from effecting salvation for him, except he be hindered
   by his still greater love for righteousness or justice. Yet the latter
   kind of love is so far from operating as a hindrance to God from
   becoming a rewarder of those who diligently seek Him, that on the
   contrary, it promotes in every possible way the bestowment of that
   reward. Those persons, therefore, who seek God, can by no means indulge
   in a single doubt concerning his readiness to remunerate. And it is
   this which acts as a preservative against despair or distrust. Since
   this is the actual state of the case, this two-fold love, and the
   mutual relation which each part of it bears to the other and which we
   have just unfolded, are the foundations of religion, without which no
   religion can possibly exist. That doctrine, therefore, which is in open
   hostility to this mutual love and to the relation that mutually
   subsists between them, is, at the same time, subversive of the
   foundation of all religion.

   XX. Lastly. This doctrine of Predestination has been rejected both in
   former times and in our own days, by the greater part of the professors
   of Christianity.

   1. But, omitting all mention of the periods that occurred in former
   ages, facts themselves declare, that the Lutheran and Anabaptist
   Churches, as well as that of Rome, account this to be an erroneous
   doctrine.

   2. However highly Luther and Melancthon might at the very commencement
   of the reformation, have approved of this doctrine, they afterwards
   deserted it. This change in Melancthon is quite apparent from his
   latter writings: And those who style themselves "Luther's disciples,"
   make the same statement respecting their master, while they contend
   that on this subject he made a more distinct and copious declaration of
   his sentiments, instead of entirely abandoning those which he formerly
   entertained. But Philip Melancthon believed that this doctrine did not
   differ greatly from the fate of the Stoics: This appears from many of
   his writings, but more particularly in a certain letter which he
   addressed to Gasper Peucer, and in which, among other things, he
   states: "Llius writes to me and says, that the controversy respecting
   the Stoical Fate is agitated with such uncommon fervour at Geneva, that
   one individual is cast into prison because he happened to differ from
   Zeno. O unhappy times! When the doctrine of salvation is thus obscured
   by certain strange disputes!"

   3. All the Danish Churches embrace a doctrine quite opposed to this, as
   is obvious from the writings of Nicholas Hemmingius in his treatise on
   Universal Grace, in which he declares that the contest between him and
   his adversaries consisted in the determination of these two points: "do
   the Elect believe ," or, "are believers the true elect?" He considers
   "those persons who maintain the former position, to hold sentiments
   agreeable to the doctrine of the Manichees and Stoics; and those who
   maintain the latter point, are in obvious agreement with Moses and the
   Prophets, with Christ and his Apostles."

   4. Besides, by many of the inhabitants of these our own provinces, this
   doctrine is accounted a grievance of such a nature, as to cause several
   of them to affirm, that on account of it, they neither can nor will
   have any communion with our Church. Others of them have united
   themselves with our Churches, but not without entering a protest, "that
   they cannot possibly give their consent to this doctrine." But, on
   account of this kind of Predestination, our Churches have been deserted
   by not a few individuals, who formerly held the same opinions as
   ourselves: Others, also, have threatened to depart from us, unless they
   be fully assured that the Church holds no opinion of this description.

   5. There is likewise no point of doctrine which the Papists,
   Anabaptists, and Lutherans oppose with greater vehemence than this, and
   through whose sides they create a worse opinion of our Churches or
   procure for them a greater portion of hatred, and thus bring into
   disrepute all the doctrines which we profess. They likewise affirm
   "that of all the blasphemies against God which the mind of man can
   conceive or his tongue can express, there is none so foul as not to be
   deduced by fair consequence from this opinion of our doctors."

   6. Lastly. Of all the difficulties and controversies which have arisen
   in these our Churches since the time of the Reformation, there is none
   that has not had its origin in this doctrine, or that has not, at
   least, been mixed with it. What I have here said will be found true, if
   we bring to our recollection the controversies which existed at Leyden
   in the affair of Koolhaes, at Gouda in that of Herman Herberts, at Horn
   with respect to Cornelius Wiggerston, and at Mendenblich in the affair
   of Tako Sybrants. This consideration was not among the last of those
   motives which induced me to give my most diligent attention to this
   head of doctrine, and endeavour to prevent our Churches from suffering
   any detriment from it; because, from it, the Papists have derived much
   of their increase. While all pious teachers ought most heartily to
   desire the destruction of Popery, as they would that of the kingdom of
   Antichrist, they ought with the greatest zeal, to engage in the
   attempt, and as far as it is within their power, to make the most
   efficient preparations for its overthrow.

   The preceding views are, in brief, those which I hold respecting this
   novel doctrine of Predestination. I have propounded it with all good
   faith from the very expressions of the authors themselves, that I might
   not seem to invent and attribute to them any thing which I was not able
   clearly to prove from their writings.
     __________________________________________________________________

2. A SECOND KIND OF PREDESTINATION.

   But some other of our doctors state the subject of God's Predestination
   in a manner somewhat different. We will cursorily touch upon the two
   modes which they employ. Among some of them the following opinion is
   prevalent:

   1. God determined within himself, by an eternal and immutable decree,
   to make (according to his own good pleasure,) the smaller portion out
   of the general mass of mankind partakers of his grace and glory, to the
   praise of his own glorious grace. But according to his pleasure he also
   passed by the greater portion of men, and left them in their own
   nature, which is incapable of every thing supernatural, [or beyond
   itself,] and did not communicate to them that saving and supernatural
   grace by which their nature, (if it still retained its integrity,)
   might be strengthened, or by which, if it were corrupted, it might be
   restored--for a demonstration of his own liberty. Yet after God had
   made these men sinners and guilty of death, he punished them with death
   eternal--for a demonstration of his own justice.

   2. Predestination is to be considered in respect to its end and to the
   means which tend to it. But these persons employ the word
   "Predestination" in its special acceptation for election and oppose it
   to reprobation. (1.) In respect to its end, (which is salvation, and an
   illustration of the glorious grace of God,) man is considered in common
   and absolutely, such as he is in his own nature. (2.) But in respect to
   the means, man is considered as perishing from himself and in himself,
   and as guilty in Adam.

   3. In the decree concerning the end, the following gradations are to be
   regarded. (1.) The prescience of God, by which he foreknew those whom
   he had predestinated. Then (2.) The Divine prefinition, [or
   predetermination,] by which he foreordained the salvation of those
   persons by whom he had foreknown. First, by electing them from all
   eternity: and secondly, by preparing for them grace in this life, and
   glory in the world to come.

   4. The means which belong to the execution of this Predestination, are
   (1.) Christ himself: (2.) An efficacious call to faith in Christ, from
   which justification takes its origin: (3.) The gift of perseverance
   unto the end.

   5. As far as we are capable of comprehending their scheme of
   reprobation it consists of two acts, that of preterition and that of
   predamnatian. It is antecedent to all things, and to all causes which
   are either in the things themselves or which arise out of them; that
   is, it has no regard whatever to any sin, and only views man in an
   absolute and general aspect.

   6. Two means are fore-ordained for the execution of the act of
   preterition: (1.) Dereliction [or abandoning] in a state of nature,
   which by itself is incapable of every thing supernatural: and (2.)
   Non-communication [or a negation] of supernatural grace, by which their
   nature (if in a state of integrity,) might be strengthened, and (if in
   a state of corruption,) might be restored.

   7. Predamnation is antecedent to all things, yet it does by no means
   exist without a fore-knowledge of the causes of damnation. It views man
   as a sinner, obnoxious to damnation in Adam, and as on this account
   perishing through the necessity of Divine justice.

   8. The means ordained for the execution of this predamnation, are (1.)
   Just desertion, which is either that of exploration, [or examination,]
   in which God does not confer his grace, or that of punishment when God
   takes away from a man all his saving gifts, and delivers him over to
   the power of Satan. (2.) The second means are induration or hardening,
   and those consequences which usually follow even to the real damnation
   of the person reprobated.
     __________________________________________________________________

3. A THIRD KIND OF PREDESTINATION.

   But others among our doctors state their sentiments on this subject in
   the following manner:

   1. Because God willed within himself from all eternity to make a decree
   by which he might elect certain men and reprobate the rest, he viewed
   and considered the human race not only as created but likewise as
   fallen or corrupt, and on that account obnoxious to cursing and
   malediction. Out of this lapsed and accursed state God determined to
   liberate certain individuals and freely to save them by his grace, for
   a declaration of his mercy; but he resolved in his own just judgment to
   leave the rest under the curse [or malediction] for a declaration of
   his justice. In both these cases God acts without the least
   consideration of repentance and faith in those whom he elects, or of
   impenitence and unbelief in those whom he reprobates.

   2. The special means which relate particularly to the execution both of
   election and reprobation, are the very same as those which we have
   already expounded in the first of these kinds of Predestination, with
   the exception of those means which are common both to election and
   reprobation; because this [third] opinion places the fall of man, not
   as a means fore-ordained for the execution of the preceding decree of
   Predestination, but as something that might furnish a fixed purpose or
   occasion for making this decree of Predestination.
     __________________________________________________________________

4. MY JUDGMENT RESPECTING THE TWO LAST DESCRIBED SCHEMES OF PREDESTINATION.

   Both these opinions, as they outwardly pretend, differ from the first
   in this point--that neither of them lays down the creation or the fall
   as a mediate cause fore-ordained by God for the execution of the
   preceding decree of Predestination. Yet, with regard to the fall, some
   diversity may be perceived in the two latter opinions. For the second
   kind of Predestination places election, with regard to the end, before
   the fall; it also places before that event preterition, [or passing
   by,] which is the first part of reprobation. While the third kind does
   not allow any part of election and reprobation to commence till after
   the fall of man. But, among the causes which seem to have induced the
   inventors of the two latter schemes to deliver the doctrine of
   Predestination in this manner, and not to ascend to such a great height
   as the inventors of the first scheme have done, this is not the
   least--that they have been desirous of using the greatest precaution,
   lest it might be concluded from their doctrine that God is the author
   of sin, with as much show of probability as, (according to the
   intimation of some of those who yield their assent to both the latter
   kinds,) it is deducible from the first description of Predestination.

   Yet if we be willing to inspect these two latter opinions a little more
   closely, and in particular if we accurately examine the second and
   third kind and compare them with other sentiments of the same author
   concerning some subjects of our religion, we shall discover, that the
   fall of Adam cannot possibly, according to their views, be considered
   in any other manner than as a necessary means for the execution of the
   preceding decree of Predestination.

   1. In reference to the second of the three, this is apparent from two
   reasons comprised in it:

   The first of these reasons is that which states God to have determined
   by the decree of reprobation to deny to man that grace which was
   necessary for the confirmation and strengthening of his nature, that it
   might not be corrupted by sin; which amounts to this, that God decreed
   not to bestow that grace which was necessary to avoid sin; and from
   this must necessarily follow the transgression of man, as proceeding
   from a law imposed on him. The fall of man is therefore a means
   ordained for the execution of the decree of reprobation.

   The second of these reasons is that which states the two parts of
   reprobation to be preterition and predamnation. These two parts,
   according to that decree, are connected together by a necessary and
   mutual bond, and are equally extensive. For, all those whom God passed
   by in conferring Divine grace, are likewise damned. Indeed no others
   are damned, except those who are the subjects of this act of
   preterition. From this therefore it may be concluded, that "sin must
   necessarily follow from the decree of reprobation or preterition,
   because, if it were otherwise, it might possibly happen, that a person
   who had been passed by, might not commit sin, and from that
   circumstance might not become liable to damnation; since sin is the
   sole meritorious cause of damnation: and thus certain of those
   individuals who had been passed by, might neither be saved nor
   damned--which is great absurdity.

   This second opinion on Predestination, therefore, falls into the same
   inconvenience as the first. For it not only does not avoid that
   [conclusion of making God the author of sin,] but while those who
   profess it make the attempt, they fall into a palpable and absurd
   self-contradiction--while, in reference to this point, the first of
   these opinions is alike throughout and consistent with itself.

   2. The third of these schemes of Predestination would escape this rock
   to much better effect, did not the patrons of it, while declaring their
   sentiments on Predestination and providence, employ certain
   expressions, from which the necessity of the fall might be deduced. Yet
   this necessity cannot possibly have any other origin than some degree
   of Predestination.

   (1.) One of these explanatory expressions is their description of the
   Divine permission, by which God permits sin. Some of them describe it
   thus: "permission is the withdrawing of that Divine grace, by which,
   when God executes the decrees of his will through rational creatures,
   he either does not reveal to the creature that divine will of his own
   by which he wills that action to be performed, or does not bend the
   will of the creature to yield obedience in that act to the Divine
   will." To these expressions, the following are immediately subjoined:
   "if this be a correct statement, the creature commits sin through
   necessity, yet voluntarily and without restraint." If it be objected
   that "this description does not comport with that permission by which
   God permitted the sin of Adam:" We also entertain the same opinion
   about it. Yet it follows, as a consequence, from this very description,
   that "other sins are committed through necessity."

   (2.) Of a similar tendency are the expressions which some of them use,
   when they contend, that the declaration of the glory of God, which must
   necessarily be illustrated, is placed in "the demonstration of mercy
   and of punitive justice." But such a demonstration could not have been
   made, unless sin, and misery through sin, had entered into the world,
   to form at least some degree of misery for the least sin. And in this
   manner is sin also necessarily introduced, through the necessity of
   such a demonstration of the Divine glory. Since the fall of Adam is
   already laid down to be necessary, and, on that account, to be a means
   for executing the preceding decree of Predestination; creation itself
   is likewise at the same time laid down as a means subservient to the
   execution of the same decree. For the fall cannot be necessarily
   consequent upon the creation, except through the decree of
   Predestination, which cannot be placed between the creation and the
   fall, but is prefixed to both of them, as having the precedence, and
   ordaining creation for the fall, and both of them for executing one and
   the same decree--to demonstrate the justice of God in the punishment of
   sin, and his mercy in its remission. Because, if this were not the
   case, that which must necessarily ensue from the act of creation had
   not seen intended by God when he created, which is to suppose an
   impossibility.

   But let it be granted, that the necessity of the fall of Adam cannot be
   deduced from either of the two latter opinions, yet all the preceding
   arguments which have been produced against the first opinion, are,
   after a trifling modification to suit the varied purpose, equally valid
   against the two latter. This would be very apparent, if, to demonstrate
   it, a conference were to be instituted.
     __________________________________________________________________

5. MY OWN SENTIMENTS ON PREDESTINATION.
     __________________________________________________________________

   I have hitherto been stating those opinions concerning the article of
   Predestination which are inculcated in our Churches and in the
   University of Leyden, and of which I disapprove. I have at the same
   time produced my own reasons, why I form such an unfavourable judgment
   concerning them; and I will now declare my own opinions on this
   subject, which are of such a description as, according to my views,
   appear most conformable to the word of God.

   I. The first absolute decree of God concerning the salvation of sinful
   man, is that by which he decreed to appoint his Son, Jesus Christ, for
   a Mediator, Redeemer, saviour, Priest and King, who might destroy sin
   by his own death, might by his obedience obtain the salvation which had
   been lost, and might communicate it by his own virtue.

   II. The second precise and absolute decree of God, is that in which he
   decreed to receive into favour those who repent and believe, and, in
   Christ, for his sake and through Him, to effect the salvation of such
   penitents and believers as persevered to the end; but to leave in sin,
   and under wrath, all impenitent persons and unbelievers, and to damn
   them as aliens from Christ.

   III. The third Divine decree is that by which God decreed to administer
   in a sufficient and efficacious manner the means which were necessary
   for repentance and faith; and to have such administration instituted
   (1.) according to the Divine Wisdom, by which God knows what is proper
   and becoming both to his mercy and his severity, and (2.) according to
   Divine Justice, by which He is prepared to adopt whatever his wisdom
   may prescribe and put it in execution.

   IV. To these succeeds the fourth decree, by which God decreed to save
   and damn certain particular persons. This decree has its foundation in
   the foreknowledge of God, by which he knew from all eternity those
   individuals who would, through his preventing grace, believe, and,
   through his subsequent grace would persevere, according to the before
   described administration of those means which are suitable and proper
   for conversion and faith; and, by which foreknowledge, he likewise knew
   those who would not believe and persevere.

   Predestination, when thus explained, is

   1. The foundation of Christianity, and of salvation and its certainty.

   2. It is the sum and the matter of the gospel; nay, it is the gospel
   itself, and on that account necessary to be believed in order to
   salvation, as far as the two first articles are concerned.

   3. It has had no need of being examined or determined by any council,
   either general or particular, since it is contained in the scriptures
   clearly and expressly in so many words; and no contradiction has ever
   yet been offered to it by any orthodox Divine.

   4. It has constantly been acknowledged and taught by all Christian
   teachers who held correct and orthodox sentiments.

   5. It agrees with that harmony of all confessions, which has been
   published by the protestant Churches.

   6. It likewise agrees most excellently with the Dutch Confession and
   Catechism. This concord is such, that if in the Sixteenth article these
   two expressions "those persons whom" and "others," be explained by the
   words "believers" and "unbelievers" these opinions of mine on
   Predestination will be comprehended in that article with the greatest
   clearness. This is the reason why I directed the thesis to be composed
   in the very words of the Confession, when, on one occasion, I had to
   hold a public disputation before my private class in the University.
   This kind of Predestination also agrees with the reasoning contained in
   the twentieth and the fifty-fourth question of the Catechism.

   7. It is also in excellent accordance with the nature of God with his
   wisdom, goodness, and righteousness; because it contains the principal
   matter of all of them, and is the clearest demonstration of the Divine
   wisdom, goodness, and righteousness [or justice]

   8. It is agreeable in every point with the nature of man--in what form
   soever that nature may be contemplated, whether in the primitive state
   of creation, in that of the fall, or in that of restoration.

   9. It is in complete concert with the act of creation, by affirming
   that the creation itself is a real communication of good, both from the
   intention of God, and with regard to the very end or event; that it had
   its origin in the goodness of God; that whatever has a reference to its
   continuance and preservation, proceeds from Divine love; and that this
   act of creation is a perfect and appropriate work of God, in which he
   is at complaisance with himself, and by which he obtained all things
   necessary for an unsinning state.

   10. It agrees with the nature of life eternal, and with the honourable
   titles by which that life is designated in the scriptures.

   11. It also agrees with the nature of death eternal, and with the names
   by which that death is distinguished in scripture.

   12. It states sin to be a real disobedience, and the meritorious cause
   of condemnation; and on this account, it is in the most perfect
   agreement with the fall and with sin.

   13. In every particular, it harmonizes with the nature of grace, by
   ascribing to it all those things which agree with it, [or adapted to
   it,] and by reconciling it most completely to the righteousness of God
   and to the nature and liberty of the human will.

   14. It conduces most conspicuously to declare the glory of God, his
   justice and his mercy. It also represents God as the cause of all good
   and of our salvation, and man as the cause of sin and of his own
   damnation.

   15. It contributes to the honour of Jesus Christ, by placing him for
   the foundation of Predestination and the meritorious as well as
   communicative cause of salvation.

   16. It greatly promotes the salvation of men: It is also the power, and
   the very means which lead to salvation--by exciting and creating within
   the mind of man sorrow on account of sin, a solicitude about his
   conversion, faith in Jesus Christ, a studious desire to perform good
   works, and zeal in prayer--and by causing men to work out their
   salvation with fear and trembling. It likewise prevents despair, as far
   as such prevention is necessary.

   17. It confirms and establishes that order according to which the
   gospel ought to be preached, (1.) By requiring repentance and faith --
   (2.) And then by promising remission of sins, the grace of the spirit,
   and life eternal.

   18. It strengthens the ministry of the gospel, and renders it
   profitable with respect to preaching, the administration of the
   sacraments and public prayers.

   19. It is the foundation of the Christian religion; because in it, the
   two-fold love of God may be united together--

   God's love of righteousness [or justice], and his love of men, may,
   with the greatest consistency, be reconciled to each other.

   20. Lastly. This doctrine of Predestination, has always been approved
   by the great majority of professing Christians, and even now, in these
   days, it enjoys the same extensive patronage. It cannot afford any
   person just cause for expressing his aversion to it; nor can it give
   any pretext for contention in the Christian Church.

   It is therefore much to be desired, that men would proceed no further
   in this matter, and would not attempt to investigate the unsearchable
   judgments of God--at least that they would not proceed beyond the point
   at which those judgments have been clearly revealed in the scriptures.

   This, my most potent Lords, is all that I intend now to declare to your
   mightinesses, respecting the doctrine of Predestination, about which
   there exists such a great controversy in the Church of Christ. If it
   would not prove too tedious to your Lordships, I have some other
   propositions which I could wish to state, because they contribute to a
   full declaration of my sentiments, and tend to the same purpose as that
   for which I have been ordered to attend in this place by your
   mightinesses.

   There are certain other articles of the Christian religion, which
   possess a close affinity to the doctrine of Predestination, and which
   are in a great measure dependent on it: Of this description are the
   providence of God, the free-will of man, the perseverance of saints,
   and the certainty of salvation. On these topics, if not disagreeable to
   your mightinesses, I will in a brief manner relate my opinion.
     __________________________________________________________________

  II. THE PROVIDENCE OF GOD

   I consider Divine Providence to be "that solicitous, continued, and
   universally present inspection and oversight of God, according to which
   he exercises a general care over the whole world, but evinces a
   particular concern for all his [intelligent] creatures without any
   exception, with the design of preserving and governing them in their
   own essence, qualities, actions, and passions, in a manner that is at
   once worthy of himself and suitable to them, to the praise of his name
   and the salvation of believers. In this definition of Divine
   Providence, I by no means deprive it of any particle of those
   properties which agree with it or belong to it; but I declare that it
   preserves, regulates, governs and directs all things and that nothing
   in the world happens fortuitously or by chance. Beside this, I place in
   subjection to Divine Providence both the free-will and even the actions
   of a rational creature, so that nothing can be done without the will of
   God, not even any of those things which are done in opposition to it;
   only we must observe a distinction between good actions and evil ones,
   by saying, that "God both wills and performs good acts," but that "He
   only freely permits those which are evil." Still farther than this, I
   very readily grant, that even all actions whatever, concerning evil,
   that can possibly be devised or invented, may be attributed to Divine
   Providence Employing solely one caution, "not to conclude from this
   concession that God is the cause of sin." This I have testified with
   sufficient clearness, in a certain disputation concerning the
   Righteousness and Efficacy of Divine Providence concerning things that
   are evil, which was discussed at Leyden on two different occasions, as
   a divinity-act, at which I presided. In that disputation, I endeavoured
   to ascribe to God whatever actions concerning sin I could possibly
   conclude from the scriptures to belong to him; and I proceeded to such
   a length in my attempt, that some persons thought proper on that
   account to charge me with having made God the author of sin. The same
   serious allegation has likewise been often produced against me, from
   the pulpit, in the city of Amsterdam, on account of those very theses;
   but with what show of justice such a charge was made, may be evident to
   any one, from the contents of my written answer to those Thirty-one
   Articles formerly mentioned, which have been falsely imputed to me, and
   of which this was one.
     __________________________________________________________________

  III. THE FREE-WILL OF MAN

   This is my opinion concerning the free-will of man: In his primitive
   condition as he came out of the hands of his creator, man was endowed
   with such a portion of knowledge, holiness and power, as enabled him to
   understand, esteem, consider, will, and to perform the true good,
   according to the commandment delivered to him. Yet none of these acts
   could he do, except through the assistance of Divine Grace. But in his
   lapsed and sinful state, man is not capable, of and by himself, either
   to think, to will, or to do that which is really good; but it is
   necessary for him to be regenerated and renewed in his intellect,
   affections or will, and in all his powers, by God in Christ through the
   Holy Spirit, that he may be qualified rightly to understand, esteem,
   consider, will, and perform whatever is truly good. When he is made a
   partaker of this regeneration or renovation, I consider that, since he
   is delivered from sin, he is capable of thinking, willing and doing
   that which is good, but yet not without the continued aids of Divine
   Grace.
     __________________________________________________________________

  IV. THE GRACE OF GOD

   In reference to Divine Grace, I believe, 1. It is a gratuitous
   affection by which God is kindly affected towards a miserable sinner,
   and according to which he, in the first place, gives his Son, "that
   whosoever believes in him might have eternal life," and, afterwards, he
   justifies him in Christ Jesus and for his sake, and adopts him into the
   right of sons, unto salvation. 2. It is an infusion (both into the
   human understanding and into the will and affections,) of all those
   gifts of the Holy Spirit which appertain to the regeneration and
   renewing of man--such as faith, hope, charity, &c.; for, without these
   gracious gifts, man is not sufficient to think, will, or do any thing
   that is good. 3. It is that perpetual assistance and continued aid of
   the Holy Spirit, according to which He acts upon and excites to good
   the man who has been already renewed, by infusing into him salutary
   cogitations, and by inspiring him with good desires, that he may thus
   actually will whatever is good; and according to which God may then
   will and work together with man, that man may perform whatever he
   wills.

   In this manner, I ascribe to grace the commencement, the continuance
   and the consummation of all good, and to such an extent do I carry its
   influence, that a man, though already regenerate, can neither conceive,
   will, nor do any good at all, nor resist any evil temptation, without
   this preventing and exciting, this following and co-operating grace.
   From this statement it will clearly appear, that I by no means do
   injustice to grace, by attributing, as it is reported of me, too much
   to man's free-will. For the whole controversy reduces itself to the
   solution of this question, "is the grace of God a certain irresistible
   force?" That is, the controversy does not relate to those actions or
   operations which may be ascribed to grace, (for I acknowledge and
   inculcate as many of these actions or operations as any man ever did,)
   but it relates solely to the mode of operation, whether it be
   irresistible or not. With respect to which, I believe, according to the
   scriptures, that many persons resist the Holy Spirit and reject the
   grace that is offered.
     __________________________________________________________________

  V. THE PERSEVERANCE OF THE SAINTS

   My sentiments respecting the perseverance of the saints are, that those
   persons who have been grafted into Christ by true faith, and have thus
   been made partakers of his life-giving Spirit, possess sufficient
   powers [or strength] to fight against Satan, sin, the world and their
   own flesh, and to gain the victory over these enemies--yet not without
   the assistance of the grace of the same Holy Spirit. Jesus Christ also
   by his Spirit assists them in all their temptations, and affords them
   the ready aid of his hand; and, provided they stand prepared for the
   battle, implore his help, and be not wanting to themselves, Christ
   preserves them from falling. So that it is not possible for them, by
   any of the cunning craftiness or power of Satan, to be either seduced
   or dragged out of the hands of Christ. But I think it is useful and
   will be quite necessary in our first convention, [or Synod] to
   institute a diligent inquiry from the Scriptures, whether it is not
   possible for some individuals through negligence to desert the
   commencement of their existence in Christ, to cleave again to the
   present evil world, to decline from the sound doctrine which was once
   delivered to them, to lose a good conscience, and to cause Divine grace
   to be ineffectual.

   Though I here openly and ingenuously affirm, I never taught that a true
   believer can, either totally or finally fall away from the faith, and
   perish; yet I will not conceal, that there are passages of scripture
   which seem to me to wear this aspect; and those answers to them which I
   have been permitted to see, are not of such a kind as to approve
   themselves on all points to my understanding. On the other hand,
   certain passages are produced for the contrary doctrine [of
   unconditional perseverance] which are worthy of much consideration.
     __________________________________________________________________

  VI. THE ASSURANCE OF SALVATION

   With regard to the certainty [or assurance] of salvation, my opinion
   is, that it is possible for him who believes in Jesus Christ to be
   certain and persuaded, and, if his heart condemn him not, he is now in
   reality assured, that he is a son of God, and stands in the grace of
   Jesus Christ. Such a certainty is wrought in the mind, as well by the
   action of the Holy Spirit inwardly actuating the believer and by the
   fruits of faith, as from his own conscience, and the testimony of God's
   Spirit witnessing together with his conscience. I also believe, that it
   is possible for such a person, with an assured confidence in the grace
   of God and his mercy in Christ, to depart out of this life, and to
   appear before the throne of grace, without any anxious fear or terrific
   dread: and yet this person should constantly pray, "O lord, enter not
   into judgment with thy servant!"

   But, since "God is greater than our hearts, and knoweth all things,"
   and since a man judges not his own self--yea, though a man know nothing
   by himself, yet is he not thereby justified, but he who judgeth him is
   the Lord, (1 John iii. 19; 1 Cor. iv. 3,) I dare not [on this account]
   place this assurance [or certainty] on an equality with that by which
   we know there is a God, and that Christ is the saviour of the world.
   Yet it will be proper to make the extent of the boundaries of this
   assurance, a subject of inquiry in our convention.
     __________________________________________________________________

  VII. THE PERFECTION OF BELIEVERS IN THIS LIFE

   Beside those doctrines on which I have treated, there is now much
   discussion among us respecting the perfection of believers, or
   regenerated persons, in this life; and it is reported, that I entertain
   sentiments on this subject, which are very improper, and nearly allied
   to those of the Pelagians, viz: "that it is possible for the regenerate
   in this life perfectly to keep God's precepts." To this I reply, though
   these might have been my sentiments yet I ought not on this account to
   be considered a Pelagian, either partly or entirely, provided I had
   only added that "they could do this by the grace of Christ, and by no
   means without it." But while I never asserted, that a believer could
   perfectly keep the precepts of Christ in this life, I never denied it,
   but always left it as a matter which has still to be decided. For I
   have contented myself with those sentiments which St. Augustine has
   expressed on this subject, whose words have frequently quoted in the
   University, and have usually subjoined, that I had no addition to make
   to them.

   Augustine says, "four questions may claim our attention on this topic.
   The first is, was there ever yet a man without sin, one who from the
   beginning of life to its termination never committed sin? The second,
   has there ever been, is there now, or can there possibly be, an
   individual who does not sin, that is, who has attained to such a state
   of perfection in this life as not to commit sin, but perfectly to
   fulfill the law of God? The third, is it possible for a man in this
   life to exist without sin? The fourth, if it be possible for a man to
   be without sin, why has such an individual never yet been found?" St.
   Augustine says, that such a person as is described in the first
   question never yet lived, or will hereafter be brought into existence,
   with the exception of Jesus Christ. He does not think, that any man has
   attained to such perfection in this life as is portrayed in the second
   question. With regard to the third, he thinks it possible for a man to
   be without sin, by means of the grace of Christ and free-will. In
   answer to the fourth, man does not do what it is possible for him by
   the grace of Christ to perform, either because that which is good
   escapes his observation, or because in it he places no part of his
   delight." From this quotation it is apparent, that St. Augustine, one
   of the most strenuous adversaries of the Pelagian doctrine, retained
   this sentiment, that "it is possible for a man to live in this world
   without sin."

   Beside this, the same Christian father says, "let Pelagius confess,
   that it is possible for man to be without sin, in no other way than by
   the grace of Christ, and we will be at peace with each other." The
   opinion of Pelagius appeared to St. Augustine to be this--"that man
   could fulfill the law of God by his own proffer strength and ability;
   but with still "greater facility by means of the grace of Christ." I
   have already most abundantly stated the great distance at which I stand
   from such a sentiment; in addition to which I now declare, that I
   account this sentiment of Pelagius to be heretical, and diametrically
   opposed to these words of Christ, "Without me ye can do nothing:" (John
   xv. 5.) It is likewise very destructive, and inflicts a most grievous
   wound on the glory of Christ.

   I cannot see that anything is contained in all I have hitherto produced
   respecting my sentiments, on account of which any person ought to be
   "afraid of appearing in the presence of God," and from which it might
   be feared that any mischievous consequences can possibly arise. Yet
   because every day brings me fresh information about reports concerning
   me, "that I carry in my breast destructive sentiments and heresies," I
   cannot possibly conceive to what points those charges can relate,
   except perhaps they draw some such pretext from my opinion concerning
   the Divinity of the Son of God, and the justification of man before
   God. Indeed, I have lately learnt, that there has been much public
   conversation, and many rumors have been circulated, respecting my
   opinion on both these points of doctrine, particularly since the last
   conference [between Gomarus and myself] before the Counselors of the
   Supreme Court. This is one reason why I think, that I shall not be
   acting unadvisedly if I disclose to your mightinesses the real state of
   the whole matter.
     __________________________________________________________________

  VIII. THE DIVINITY OF THE SON OF GOD

   With regard to the Divinity of the Son of God and the word autoqeov
   both of which have been discussed in our University in the regular form
   of scholastic disputations, I cannot sufficiently wonder what the
   motive can be, which has created a wish in some persons to render me
   suspected to other men, or to make me an object of suspicion to
   themselves. This is still more wonderful, since this suspicion has not
   the least ground of probability on which to rest, and is at such an
   immense distance from all reason and truth, that, whatever reports have
   been spread abroad respecting this affair to the prejudice of my
   character, they can be called nothing better than "notorious
   calumnies." At a disputation held one afternoon in the University, when
   the thesis that had been proposed for disputation was the Divinity of
   the Son of God, one of the students happened to object, "that the Son
   of God was autotheos, and that he therefore had his essence from
   himself and not from the Father." In reply to this I observed, "that
   the word autotheos was capable of two different acceptations, since it
   might signify either "one who is truly God," or "one who is God of
   himself;" and that it was with great propriety and correctness
   attributed to the Son of God according to the former signification, but
   not according to the latter." The student, in prosecution of his
   argument, violently contended, that the word was justly applicable to
   the Son of God, principally according to the second of these
   significations: and that the essence of the Father could not be said to
   be communicated to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, in any other than in
   an improper sense; but that it was in perfect correctness and strict
   propriety common alike to the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost." He
   added "that he asserted this with the greater confidence because he had
   the younger Trelcatius of pious memory, [but who was then living,] as
   an authority in his favour on this point; for that learned Professor
   had written to the same purport in his Common Places." To these
   observations I answered, "that this opinion was at variance with the
   word of God, and with the whole of the ancient Church, both Greek and
   Latin, which had always taught, that the Son had His Deity from the
   Father by eternal generation." To these remarks I subjoined, "that from
   such an opinion as this, necessarily followed the two mutually
   conflicting errors, Tri-theism and Sabellianism; that is, (1.) It would
   ensue as a necessary consequence, from these premises, that there are
   three Gods, who have together and collaterally the Divine essence,
   independently of this circumstance--that one of them (being only
   personally distinguished from the rest) has that essence from another
   of the persons. Yet the proceeding of the origin of one person from
   another, (that is, of the Son from the Father,) is the only foundation
   that has ever been used for defending the Unity of the Divine Essence
   in the Trinity of Persons. (2.) It would likewise follow as another
   consequence, that the Son would himself be the Father, because he would
   differ from the Father in nothing but in regard to name, which was the
   opinion of Sabellius. For, since it is peculiar to the Father to derive
   his Deity from himself, or (to speak more correctly,) to derive it from
   no one, if, in the sense of being "God of himself," the Son be called
   autotheos, it follows that he is the Father." Some account of this
   disputation was dispersed abroad in all directions, and it reached
   Amsterdam. A minister of that city, who now rests in the Lord, having
   interrogated me respecting the real state of this affair, I related the
   whole of it to him plainly, as I have now done: and I requested him to
   make Trelcatius of blessed memory acquainted with it as it had actually
   occurred, and to advise him in a friendly manner to amend his opinion,
   and to correct those inappropriate words in his Common Places: this
   request the minister from Amsterdam engaged to fulfill in his own way.

   In all this proceeding I am far from being liable to any blame; for I
   have defended the truth and the sentiments of the Catholic and Orthodox
   Church. Trelcatius undoubtedly was the person most open to
   animadversion; for he adopted a mode of speaking which detracted
   somewhat from the truth of the matter. But such has always been either
   my own infelicity or the zeal of certain individuals that, as soon as
   any disagreement arises, all the blame is instantly cast upon me, as if
   it was impossible for me to display as much veracity [or orthodoxy] as
   any other person. Yet on this subject I have Gomarus himself consenting
   with me; for, soon after Trelcatius had published his common places, a
   disputation on the Trinity having been proposed in the University,
   Gomarus did in three several parts of his theses express himself in
   such terms as were diametrically opposed to those of Trelcatius. The
   very obvious difference in opinion between those two Professors I
   pointed out to the Amsterdam minister, who acknowledged its existence.
   Yet, notwithstanding all these things, no one endeavoured to vindicate
   me from this calumny; while great exertion was employed to frame
   excuses for Trelcatius, by means of a qualified interpretation of his
   words, though it was utterly impossible to reconcile their palliative
   explanations with the plain signification of his unperverted
   expressions. Such are the effects which the partiality of favour and
   the fervour of zeal can produce!

   The milder and qualified interpretation put upon the words of
   Trelcatius, was the following: "the Son of God may be styled autotheos,
   or may be said to have his Deity from himself, in reference to his
   being God, although he has his Deity from the Father, in reference to
   his being the Son." For the sake of a larger explanation, it is said,
   "God, or the Divine Essence, may be considered both absolutely and
   relatively. When regarded absolutely, the Son has his Divine essence
   from himself; but, when viewed relatively, he derives it from the
   Father." But these are new modes of speaking and novel opinions, and
   such as can by no means consist together. For the Son, both in regard
   to his being the Son, and to his being God, derives his Deity from the
   Father. When he is called God, it is then only not expressed that he is
   from the Father; which derivation is particularly noted when the word
   Son is employed. Indeed, the essence of God can in no manner come under
   our consideration, except it be said, "that the Divine Essence is
   communicated to the Son by the Father." Nor can it possibly in any
   different respect whatever be said, that this essence is both
   "communicated to him" and "not communicated;" because these expressions
   are contradictory, and can in no diverse respect be reconciled to each
   other. If the Son have the Divine Essence from himself in reference to
   its being absolutely considered, it cannot be communicated to him. If
   it be communicated to him in reference to its being relatively
   considered, he cannot have it from himself in reference to its being
   absolutely considered.

   I shall probably be asked, "do you not acknowledge, that, to be the Son
   of God, and to be God, are two things entirely distinct from each
   other?" I reply, undoubtedly I subscribe to such distinction. But when
   those who make it proceed still further, and say, "since to be the Son
   of God signifies that he derives his essence from the Father, to be God
   in like manner signifies nothing less than that he has his essence from
   himself or from no one;" I deny this assertion, and declare, at the
   same time, that it is a great and manifest error, not only in sacred
   theology, but likewise in natural philosophy. For, these two things, to
   be the Son and to be God, are at perfect agreement with each other; but
   to derive his essence from the Father, and, at the same time, to derive
   it from no one, are evidently contradictor, and mutually destructive
   the one of the other.

   But, to make this fallacy still more apparent, it must be observed, how
   equal in force and import are certain double ternary and parallel
   propositions, when standing in the following juxta-position:

   God is from eternity, possessing the Divine Essence from eternity. The
   Father is from no one, having the Divine Essence from no one. The Son
   is from the Father, having the Divine Essence from the Father.

   The word "God" therefore signifies, that He has the true Divine
   Essence; but the word "Son" signifies, that he has the Divine Essence
   from the Father. On this account, he is correctly denominated both God
   and the Son of God. But since he cannot be styled the Father, he cannot
   possibly be said to have the Divine Essence from himself or from no
   one. Yet much labour is devoted to the purpose of excusing these
   expressions, by saying, "that when the son of God in reference to his
   being God is said to have his essence from that form of speech
   signifies nothing more, than that the Divine essence is not derived
   from any one." But if this be thought to be the most proper mode of
   action which should be adopted, there will be no depraved or erroneous
   sentiment which can be uttered that may not thus find a ready excuse.
   For though God and the divine Essence do not differ substantially, yet
   whatever may be predicated of the Divine Essence can by no means be
   equally predicated of God; because they are distinguished from each
   other in our mode of framing conceptions, according to which mode all
   forms of speech ought to be examined, since they are employed only with
   a design that through them we should receive correct impressions. This
   is very obvious from the following examples, in which we speak with
   perfect correctness when we say, "Deum mortuum esse," and "the Essence
   of God is communicated;" but very incorrectly when we say, "God is
   communicated." That man who understands the difference existing between
   concrete and abstract, about which there were such frequent disputes
   between us and the Lutherans will easily perceive what a number of
   absurdities will ensue, if explanations of this description be once
   tolerated in the Church of God. Therefore, in no way whatever can this
   phrase, "the Son of God is autotheos," ["God of himself," or "in his
   own right,"] be excused as a correct one, or as having been happily
   expressed. Nor can that be called a proper form of speech which says,
   "the Essence of God is common to three persons;" but it is improper,
   since the Divine Essence is declared to be communicated by one of them
   to another.

   The observations which I now make, I wish to be particularly regarded,
   because it may appear from them how much we are capable of tolerating
   in a man whom we do not suspect of heresy; and, on the contrary, with
   what avidity we seize upon any trivial circumstance by which we may
   inculpate another man whom we hold under the ban of suspicion. Of such
   partiality, this incident affords two manifest examples.
     __________________________________________________________________

  IX. THE JUSTIFICATION OF MAN BEFORE GOD

   I am not conscious to myself, of having taught or entertained any other
   sentiments concerning the justification of man before God, than those
   which are held unanimously by the Reformed and Protestant Churches, and
   which are in complete agreement with their expressed opinions.

   There was lately a short controversy in relation to this subject,
   between John Piscator, Professor of Divinity in the University of
   Herborn in Nassau, and the French Churches. It consisted in the
   determination of these two questions: (1.) "is the obedience or
   righteousness of Christ, which is imputed to believers and in which
   consists their righteousness before God, is this only the passive
   obedience of Christ?" which was Piscator's opinion. Or (2.) "is it not,
   in addition to this, that active righteousness of Christ which he
   exhibited to the law of God in the whole course of his life, and that
   holiness in which he was conceived?" Which was the opinion of the
   French Churches. But I never durst mingle myself with the dispute, or
   undertake to decide it; for I thought it possible for the Professors of
   the same religion to hold different opinions on this point from others
   of their brethren, without any breach of Christian peace or the unity
   of faith. Similar peaceful thoughts appear to have been indulged by
   both the adverse parties in this dispute; for they exercised a friendly
   toleration towards each other, and did not make that a reason for
   mutually renouncing their fraternal concord. But concerning such an
   amicable plan of adjusting differences, certain individuals in our own
   country are of a different judgment.

   A question has been raised from these words of the Apostle Paul: "Faith
   is imputed for righteousness." (Rom. 4) The inquiry was, (1.) Whether
   those expressions ought to be properly understood, "so that faith
   itself, as an act performed according to the command of the gospel, is
   imputed before God for or unto righteousness--and that of grace; since
   it is not the righteousness of the law." (2.) Whether they ought to be
   figuratively and improperly understood, "that the righteousness of
   Christ, being apprehended by faith, is imputed to us for
   righteousness." Or (3.) Whether it is to be understood "that the
   righteousness, for which, or unto which, faith is imputed, is the
   instrumental operation of faith;" which is asserted by some persons. In
   the theses on justification, which were disputed under me when I was
   moderator, I have adopted the former of these opinions not in a rigid
   manner, but simply, as I have likewise done in another passage which I
   wrote in a particular letter. It is on this ground that I am accounted
   to hold and to teach unsound opinions concerning the justification of
   man before God. But how unfounded such a supposition is, will be very
   evident at a proper season, and in a mutual conference. For the
   present, I will only briefly say, "I believe that sinners are accounted
   righteous solely by the obedience of Christ; and that the righteousness
   of Christ is the only meritorious cause on account of which God pardons
   the sins of believers and reckons them as righteous as if they had
   perfectly fulfilled the law. But since God imputes the righteousness of
   Christ to none except believers, I conclude that, in this sense, it may
   be well and properly said, to a man who believes, faith is imputed for
   righteousness through grace, because God hath set forth his Son, Jesus
   Christ, to be a propitiation, a throne of grace, [or mercy seat]
   through faith in his blood." Whatever interpretation may be put upon
   these expressions, none of our Divines blames Calvin or considers him
   to be heterodox on this point; yet my opinion is not so widely
   different from his as to prevent me from employing the signature of my
   own hand in subscribing to those things which he has delivered on this
   subject, in the third book of his Institutes; this I am prepared to do
   at any time, and to give them my full approval. Most noble and potent
   Lords, these are the principal articles, respecting which I have judged
   it necessary to declare my opinion before this august meeting, in
   obedience to your commands.
     __________________________________________________________________

  X. THE REVISION OF THE DUTCH CONFESSION, AND THE HEIDELBERG CATECHISM

   But, besides these things, I had some annotations to make on the
   Confession of the Dutch Churches and on the Heidelberg Catechism; but
   they will be discussed most appropriately in our Synod, which at the
   first opportunity we hope to obtain through your consent, or rather by
   means of your summons. This is the sole request which I prefer to your
   mightinesses, that I may be permitted to offer a few brief remarks on a
   certain clause, subject to which their high mightinesses, the States
   General, gave their consent to the convening of a National Synod in
   this province, (Holland,) and the substance of which was, that in such
   Synod the Confession and Catechism of the Dutch Churches should be
   subjected to examination.

   This clause has given great umbrage to many persons, not only because
   they account it unnecessary, but likewise unjust, to subject the
   Confession and Catechism to examination. They also suppose, that I and
   a certain individual of great reputation, are the persons who prevailed
   with the States General to have such a clause inserted. But it is by no
   means true that the revision of the Confession and Catechism is
   unnecessary and unjust, or that we were the instigators of their high
   mightinesses in this affair. With regard to the last of these two
   suppositions, so far were we from having any concern with the origin of
   that clause, that, eleven or twelve years ago, at the pressing
   importunity of the Churches that prayed for a National Synod, the
   States of South Holland and West Friezland at last judged it proper to
   consent to it by their decree, on no other condition than that in such
   Synod the Confession of the Dutch Churches should be subjected to
   examination. Yet we, at that time, neither endeavoured by our advice,
   nor by our influence, to promote any such measure. But if we had with
   all our might made the attempt, we should have been doing nothing but
   what was compatible with our official duties; because it is obviously
   agreeable to reason as well as to equity, and quite necessary in the
   present posture of affairs, that such a measure should be adopted.

   First. That it may openly appear to all the world that we render to the
   word of God alone such due and suitable honour, as to determine it to
   be beyond (or rather above) all disputes, too great to be the subject
   of any exception, and worthy of all acceptation.

   Secondly. Because these pamphlets are writings that proceed from men,
   and may, on that account, contain within them some portion of error, it
   is, therefore, proper to institute a lawful inquiry, that is, in a
   National Synod, whether or not there be any thing in those productions
   which requires amendment.

   1. The first inquiry may be, whether these human writings are
   accordant, in every part, with the word of God, with regard to the
   words themselves, the construction of the sentences and the correct
   meaning.

   2. Whether they contain whatever is necessary to be believed unto
   salvation, so that salvation is, according to this rule, not denied to
   those things to which it appertains.

   3. Whether it [the rule of these formularies] does not contain far too
   many particulars, and embrace several that are not necessary to be
   believed unto salvation, so that salvation is consequently attributed
   to those things to which it does not belong.

   4. Whether certain words and forms of speech are not employed in them,
   which are capable of being understood in different ways and furnishing
   occasion for disputes. Thus, for example, in the Fourteenth article of
   the Confession, we read the following words, "nothing is done without
   God's ordination," [or appointment]: if by the word "ordination" is
   signified, "that God appoints things of any kind to be done," this mode
   of enunciation is erroneous, and it follows as a a consequence from it,
   that God is the author of sin. But if it signify, that "whatever it be
   that is done, God ordains it to a good end," the terms in which it is
   conceived are in that case correct.

   5. Whether things utterly repugnant to each other may not be discovered
   in them. For instance, a certain individual who is highly honoured in
   the Church, addressed a letter to John Piscator, Professor of Divinity
   in the University of Herborn in Nassau, and in it he exhorted him to
   confine himself within the opinion of the Heidelberg Catechism on the
   doctrine of Justification. For this purpose he cited three passage,
   which he considered to be at variance with Piscator's sentiments. But
   the learned Professor replied, that he confined himself completely
   within the doctrinal boundaries of the Catechism; and then quoted out
   of that formulary ten or eleven passages as proofs of his sentiments.
   But I solemnly declare, I do not perceive by what method these several
   passages can possibly be reconciled with each other.

   6. Whether every thing in these writings is digested in that due order
   in which the Scripture requires them to be placed.

   7. Whether all things are disposed in a manner the most suitable and
   convenient for preserving peace and unity with the rest of the reformed
   Churches.

   Thirdly. The third reason is, because a National Synod is held for the
   purpose of discovering whether all things in the Church are in a proper
   state or right condition. One of the chief duties which appertains to
   such an assembly, is, the examination of doctrine, whether it be that
   which is admitted by unanimous consent, or that for which particular
   Divines contend.

   Fourthly. The fourth reason is, because an examination of this
   description will obtain for these writings a greater degree of
   authority, when after a mature and rigid examination they shall be
   found to agree with the word of God, or shall be made conformable to it
   in a still greater measure. Such an examination will also excite within
   the minds of men a greater value for Christian ministers, when they
   perceive that these sacred functionaries hold in the highest estimation
   that truth which is revealed in Scripture, and that their attachment to
   it is so great as to induce them to spare no labour in order to render
   their own doctrine more and more conformable to that revealed truth.

   Fifthly. The fifth reason why at this, if at any period, it is
   necessary to adopt the suggestion which we have mentioned, is, (1.)
   Because there are several individuals in the ministry who have certain
   views and considerations respecting some points contained in these
   writings, which they reserve in secret and reveal to no one, because
   they hope that such points will become subjects of discussion in a
   National Synod. Because such a convention has been promised, some of
   them have suffered themselves to be persuaded not to give the least
   publicity to any of the views or considerations which they have formed
   on these subjects.

   (2.) Besides, this will be the design of a National Synod--

   That their high mightinesses the States General may be pleased to
   establish and arm with public authority certain ecclesiastical
   sanctions, according to which every one may be bound to conduct himself
   in the Church of God. That this favour may be obtained from their high
   mightinesses and that they may execute such a measure with a good
   conscience, it is necessary that they be convinced in their own
   understandings, that the doctrine contained in the formulary of union
   is agreeable to the word of God. This is a reason which ought to induce
   us spontaneously to propose an examination of our Confession before
   their high mightinesses, and to offer either to shew that it is in
   accordance with the word of God, or to render it conformable to that
   Divine standard.

   Sixthly. The sixth reason is drawn from the example of those who are
   associated together under the Augustan Confession, and from the conduct
   of the Swiss and the French Churches, that have within two or three
   years enriched their Confessions with one entirely new article. And the
   Dutch Confession has itself been subjected to examination since it was
   first published: some things having been taken away from it and others
   added, while some of the rest have undergone various alterations.

   Numerous other reasons might be produced, but I omit them; because I
   consider those already mentioned to be quite sufficient for proving,
   that the clause concerning examination and revision, as it is termed,
   was with the greatest justice and propriety inserted in the instrument
   of consent of which we have made previous mention.

   I am not ignorant, that other reasons are adduced, in opposition to
   these; and one in particular, which is made a principal subject of
   public conversation, and is accounted of all others the most solid. To
   it, therefore I consider it necessary to offer a brief reply. It is
   thus stated: "by such an examination as this, the doctrine of the
   Church will be called in question; which is neither an act of propriety
   nor of duty.

   "I. Because this doctrine has obtained the approbation and suffrages of
   many respectable and learned men; and has been strenuously defended
   against all those who have offered it any opposition.

   "II. Because it has been sealed with the blood of many thousand
   martyrs.

   "III. Because from such an examination will arise, within the Church,
   confusion, scandal, offenses, and the destruction of consciences; and,
   out of the Church, ridicule, calumnies and accusations."

   To all these I answer:

   1. It would be much better, not to employ such odious forms of speech,
   as to call in question, and others of that class, when the conversation
   is only respecting some human composition, which is liable to have
   error intermixed with its contents. For with what right can any writing
   be said to be called in question or in doubt, which was never of itself
   unquestionable, or ought to be considered as indubitable?

   2. The approbation of Divines, the defense of a composition against its
   adversaries, and the sealing of it with the blood of martyrs, do not
   render any doctrine authentic or place it beyond the limits of doubt:
   because it is possible both for Divines and martyrs to err--a
   circumstance which can admit of no denial in this argument.

   3. A distinction ought to be made between the different matters
   contained in the Confession. For while some of them make a near
   approach to the foundation of salvation and are fundamental articles of
   the Christian religion, others of them are built up as a superstructure
   on the foundation, and of themselves are not absolutely necessary to
   salvation. The doctrines of this former class are approved by the
   unanimous consent of all the Reformed, and are effectually defended
   against all gainsaying adversaries. But those of the latter class
   become subjects of controversy between different parties: and some of
   these are attacked by enemies not without some semblance of truth and
   justice.

   The blood of martyrs has sealed those of the former class but by no
   means those of the latter. In reference to this affair, it ought to be
   diligently observed, what was proposed by the martyrs of our days, and
   on what account they shed their blood. If this be done, it will be
   found, that no man among them was even interrogated on that subject
   which I consider it equitable to make a prominent part in the
   deliberations of a Synod, and, therefore, that no martyr ever sealed it
   with his blood. I will produce an example: when a question was raised
   about the meaning of the seventh chapter of the epistle to the Romans,
   one individual said, "that the passage was quoted in the margin of the
   Confession exactly in the same sense as he had embraced it, and that
   the martyrs had with their own blood sealed this Confession." But, in
   reply to this, it was stated, "that if the strictest search be
   instituted throughout the entire large history of the martyrs, as it is
   published by the French, it will be discovered, that no martyr has at
   any period been examined on that passage, or has shed his blood on that
   account."

   To sum up the whole: the blood of the martyrs tends to confirm this
   truth, that they have made profession of their faith "in simplicity and
   sincerity of conscience." But it is by no means conclusive, that the
   Confession which they produced is free from every degree of
   reprehension or superior to all exception; unless they had been led by
   Christ into all truth and therefore rendered incapable of erring.

   4. If the Church be properly instructed in that difference which really
   does and always ought to exist between the word of God and all human
   writings, and if the Church be also rightly informed concerning that
   liberty which she and all Christians possess, and which they will
   always enjoy, to measure all human compositions by the standard rule of
   God's word, she will neither distress herself on that account, nor will
   she be offended on perceiving all human writings brought to be proved
   at the touch-stone of God's word. On the contrary, she will rather feel
   far more abundant delight, when she sees, that God has bestowed on her
   in this country such pastors and teachers, as try at the chief
   touch-stone their own doctrine, in a manner at once suitable, proper,
   just, and worthy of perpetual observance; and that they do this, to be
   able exactly and by every possible means to express their agreement
   with the word of God, and their consent to it even in the most minute
   particulars.

   5. But it is no less proper, that the doctrine once received in the
   Church should be subjected to examination, however great the fear may
   be "lest disturbances should ensue, and lest evil disposed persons
   should make such revision an object of ridicule, calumny or
   accusation," or should even turn it to their own great advantage, [by
   representing the matter so as to induce a persuasion,] "that those who
   propose this examination are not sufficiently confirmed in their own
   religion ;" when, on the contrary, this is one of God's commands,
   "search and try the spirits whether they be of God." (1 John iv. 1.) If
   cogitations of that description had operated as hindrances on the minds
   of Luther, Zuinglius, and others, they would never have pried into the
   doctrine of the Papists, or have subjected it to a scrutinizing
   examination. Nor would those who adhere to the Augustan Confession have
   considered it proper to submit that formulary again to a new and
   complete revision, and to alter it in some particulars. This deed of
   theirs is an object of our praise and approval. And we conclude, that,
   when Luther towards the close of his life was advised by Philip
   Melancthon to bring the eucharistic controversy on the sacrament of the
   Lord's Supper to some better state of concord, (as it is related in the
   writings of our own countrymen,) he acted very improperly in rejecting
   that counsel, and in casting it back as a reproach on Philip, for this
   reason, as they state his declaration, "lest by such an attempt to
   effect an amicable conclusion, the whole doctrine should be called in
   question." Besides, if reasons of this kind ought to be admitted, the
   Papists with the best right and the greatest propriety formerly
   endeavoured to prevent the doctrine, which had for many preceding
   centuries been received in the Church, from being called in question or
   subjected again to examination.

   But it has been suggested, in opposition to these reasons, "that if the
   doctrine of the Churches be submitted to an entirely new revision as
   often as a National Synod shall be held, the Church would never have
   any thing to which it might adhere or on which it might fully depend,
   and it will be possible to declare with great justice, concerning
   Churches thus circumstanced, that, they have an anniversary faith: are
   tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine.
   (Ephes. iv. 14.)

   1. My first answer to these remarks, is, the Church always has Moses
   and the Prophets, the Evangelists and the Apostles, that is, the
   Scriptures of the Old and of the New Testament; and these Scriptures
   fully and clearly comprehend whatever is necessary to salvation. Upon
   them the Church will lay the foundation of her faith, and will rest
   upon them as on an immovable basis, principally because, how highly
   soever we may esteem Confessions and Catechisms every decision on
   matters of faith and religion must obtain its final resolution in the
   Scriptures.

   2. Some points in the Confession are certain and do not admit of a
   doubt: these will never be called in question by any one, except by
   heretics. Yet there are other parts of its contents which are of such a
   kind, as may with the most obvious utility become frequent subjects of
   conference and discussion between men of learning who fear God, for the
   purpose of reconciling them with those indubitable articles as nearly
   as is practicable.

   3. Let it be attempted to make the Confession contain as few articles
   as possible; and let it propose them in a very brief form, conceived
   entirely in the expressions of Scripture. Let all the more ample
   explanations, proofs, digressions, redundancies, amplifications and
   exclamations, be omitted; and let nothing be delivered in it, except
   those truths which are necessary to salvation. The consequences of this
   brevity will be, that the Confession will be less liable to be filled
   with errors, not so obnoxious to obloquy, and less subject to
   examination. Let the practice of the ancient Church be produced as an
   example, that comprehended, in as brief a form of words as was
   practicable, those articles which she judged necessary to be believed.

   Some individuals form a distinction between the Confession and the
   Catechism with respect to revision; and, since the Confession is the
   peculiar property of the Dutch Churches, and is on that account found
   in the hands of comparatively few people, they conclude, "that it is
   possible without any difficulty to revise it in a Synod and subject it
   to examination., But since the Catechism belongs not only to us, but
   likewise and principally to the Churches of the Palatinate, and is
   therefore to be found in the hands of all men, the same persons
   consider the examination of it "to be connected with great peril." But
   to this I reply, if we be desirous of constituting the Heidelberg
   Catechism a formulary of concord among the teachers of the Churches,
   and if they be obliged to subscribe it, it is still necessary to
   subject it to examination. For no Churches whatever ought to hold such
   a high station in our esteem, as to induce us to receive any writing of
   their composition without, at the same time, reserving to ourselves the
   liberty of submitting it to a nice scrutiny. And I account this to be
   the principal cause, why the Churches of different provinces, although
   at perfect agreement with each other on the fundamental points of
   Christian doctrine, have each composed for themselves their own
   Confessions. But if the Heidelberg Catechism be not allowed, to become
   a formulary of this kind, and if a suitable liberty be conceded in the
   explanation of it, it will not then be necessary either to revise it or
   subject it to examination; provided, I repeat, that the obligatory
   burden of subscription be removed, and a moderate liberty be conceded
   in its explanation.

   This is all that I had to propose to your mightinesses, as to my most
   noble, potent, wise and prudent masters. While I own myself bound to
   render an account of all my actions, to the members of this most noble
   and potent assembly, (next after God,) I at the same time present to
   them my humble and grateful acknowledgments, because they have not
   disdained to grant me a courteous and patient audience. I embrace this
   opportunity solemnly to declare, that I am sincerely prepared to
   institute an amicable and fraternal conference with my reverend
   brethren, (at whatever time or place and on whatever occasion this
   honourable assembly may judge proper to appoint,) on all the topics
   which I have now mentioned, and on any other concerning which it will
   be possible for a controversy to exist, or at some future period to
   arise. I also make this additional promise, that I will in every
   conference conduct myself with equanimity, moderation and docility, and
   will shew myself not less actuated by the desire of being taught, than
   by that of communicating to others some portion of instruction. And,
   since in the discussion of every topic on which it will be possible to
   institute a conference, two points will become objects of attention.
   First. "Whether that be true which is the subject of the controversy,"
   and, secondly, "Whether it be necessary to be believed unto salvation,"
   and since both these points ought to be discussed and proved out of the
   Scriptures, I here tender my sacred affirmation, and solemnly bind
   myself hereafter to observe it, that, however cogently I may have
   proved by the most solid [human] arguments any article to be agreeable
   to the word of God, I will not obtrude it for an article of belief on
   those of my brethren who may entertain a different opinion respecting
   it, unless I have plainly proved it from the word of God and have with
   equal clearness established its truth, and the necessity unto salvation
   that every Christian should entertain the same belief.

   If my brethren will be prepared to act in this manner, as far as I know
   the complexion of my own opinions, there will not easily arise among us
   any schism or controversy. But, that I may on my part remove every
   cause of fear that can possibly invade this most noble assembly,
   occupied and engaged as its honourable members now are with important
   concerns on which in a great measure depends the safety of our native
   country and of the Reformed Churches, I subjoin this remark, "that to
   hinder my toleration of any matters in my brethren, they must be very
   numerous and very important. For I am not of the congregation of those
   who wish to have dominion over the faith of another man, but am only a
   minister to believers, with the design of promoting in them an increase
   of knowledge, truth, piety, peace and joy in Jesus Christ our Lord."

   But if my brethren cannot perceive how they can possibly tolerate me,
   or allow me a place among them, in reference to myself I indulge in no
   hope that a schism will on this account be formed. May God avert any
   such catastrophe, since far too many schisms have already arisen and
   spread themselves abroad among Christians. It ought rather to be the
   earnest endeavour of every one, to diminish their number and destroy
   their influence. Yet, even under such circumstances, [when I shall be
   rejected from the communion of my brethren,] in patience will I possess
   my soul; and though in that case I shall resign my office, yet I will
   continue to live for the benefit of our common Christianity as long as
   it may please God to lengthen out my days and prolong my existence.
   Never forgetting this sentiment, Sat Eccles, sat Patri daturm, Enough
   has been done to satisfy the Church of Christ and my country!
     __________________________________________________________________

                                Vol I Section 3

   The Apology Or Defense Of James Arminius - From Vol. 1

   The Apology Or Defense - Part 1

   The Apology Or Defense Of James Arminius - From Vol. 2

   The Apology Or Defense - Part 2

   Nine Questions For The Professors Of Divinity To Answer

   Nine Questions

   CERTAIN articles relating to the Christian Religion are now in a course
   of circulation. In a paper which was not long since delivered into my
   hands, the number of them is distinguished into two series, one
   consisting of twenty and the other of eleven articles. Some of them are
   attributed to me, others to Adrian Borrius, and several both to him and
   me. Those persons by whom they were first disseminated, attempt in them
   to render us suspected of having introduced into the church and the
   University of Leyden, novelties and heretical instructions, and to
   accuse us of error and heresy, that both the students of Divinity and
   the common people may stand on their guard against us, who have this
   black mark imprinted on us, lest they become infected with the same
   envenomed disorder, and that those persons who enjoy the supremacy both
   in Church and State, may seasonably interpose their authority, to
   prevent the evil from extending any further, or rather to extinguish it
   in its very commencement; which, if "they neglect to do, they will be
   instrumental in producing the greatest detriment to Divine Truth, and
   to the Political and Ecclesiastical concord of these Provinces."

   The dispersion of some of these articles is not a very recent
   circumstance; for, above two years ago, seventeen out of these
   thirty-one came into my hands, expressed exactly in the same words as
   those that occur in the writing which is the subject of my present
   remarks. But I was silent, and concealed my regret; for I thought that
   those articles would, in their very infancy, die a natural death, since
   part of them were destitute of the truth of historical narration, by
   not being attributed to those who had been the authors of them; and
   part of them were void of all real theological sense, by the strange
   intermixture of truth and falsehood. But the issue did not answer my
   expectation. For they not only remained without diminution, but gained
   an increase, by the addition of other fourteen to the former seventeen
   articles, and by a far wider dispersion of the whole than had at first
   been made. This unexpected result had the effect of inducing me to
   think that I ought to oppose their progress by a moderate answer, lest
   my continued silence should be interpreted as tantamount to a
   confession. If this be the interpretation which, on many occasions is
   given to silence, it is an easy matter thus to construe it respecting
   any doctrine that is aspersed as. a heresy, "under which imputation,"
   it is said in a vaunting tone, "St. Jerome would have no man to remain
   patient."

   In this reply I will use candour and conscience. Whatever I know to be
   true, I will confess and defend. On whatever subjects I may feel
   hesitation, I will not conceal my ignorance; and whatever my mind
   dictates to be false, I will deny and refute. May the God of truth and
   peace direct my mind and my hand by his Holy Spirit! Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

ARTICLES I & II

   I. Faith, that is, justifying faith, is not peculiar to the elect.

   II. It is possible for believers finally to decline and fall away from
   faith and salvation.

  ANSWER

   The connection between these two articles is so intimate, that when the
   first of them is granted, the second is necessarily inferred; and, in
   return, when the latter is granted, the former is to be inferred,
   according to the intention of those persons who framed these articles.
   For if "faith be not peculiar to the elect," and if perseverance in
   faith and salvation belong to the elect alone, it follows that
   believers not only can, but that some of them actually do, "fall away
   from faith and salvation." And, on the contrary, if it be "possible for
   believers finally to fall away from faith and salvation," it follows
   that "faith is not peculiar to the elect," they being the individuals
   concerning whom the framers of these articles assert, that it is
   impossible for them not to be saved. The reason of the consequence is,
   because the words FAITH and BELIEVERS, according to this hypothesis,
   have a wider signification than the words ELECTION and THE ELECT. The
   former comprehend some persons that are not elect, that is, "some who
   finally fall away from faith and salvation." No necessity, therefore,
   existed for composing both these articles; it was quite sufficient to
   have proposed one. And if the authors of them had sought for such
   amplification, as had no real existence, but consisted of mere words,
   it was possible to deduce the Second from the First in the form of a
   consectary. Thus it is evident that the multitude of the articles, was
   the great object to be attempted for the purpose of making it appear as
   if those persons ERRED IN VERY MANY POINTS, whom the too sedulous
   curiosity of the brethren is desirous without cause, of rendering
   suspected of heresy.

   I. But, to treat of each article singly, I declare, respecting THE
   FIRST, that I never said, either in public or in private, "Faith is not
   peculiar to the elect." This article, therefore, is not attributed to
   its proper author; and thus is committed a historical error.

   I add, even if I had made such a declaration as this, a defense of it
   would have been ready. For I omit the scriptures, from which a more
   prolix discussion of this subject might be formed; and since the
   Christian Fathers have with great semblance of truth defended their
   sentiments from that divine source, I might employ the consent of those
   Fathers as a shield to ward off from myself the charge of NOVELTY; and
   the Harmony of Confessions, which are severally the composition of
   those Churches that have seceded from Popery, and that come under the
   denomination of" Protestants" and "the Reformed," I might adopt for a
   polished breast-plate, to intercept or turn aside the dart of HERESY
   which is hurled against me. Neither should I be much afraid of this
   subject being placed for adjudication in the balances of the Belgic
   Confession and the Heidelberg Catechism.

   1. Let St. Augustine, Prosper, and the author of the book entitled The
   Vocation of the Gentiles, be brought forward to bear testimony
   respecting "the consent of the Fathers."

   (1.) AUGUSTINE says, "It is wonderful, and indeed most wonderful, that
   God does not bestow perseverance on certain of his sons, whom he hath
   regenerated in Christ, and to whom he has given faith, hope and love;
   while he pardons such great acts of wickedness in sons that are
   alienated from him, and, by imparting his grace, makes them his
   children." (De Corrept. et Gratia, cap. 8.)

   (2.) PROSPER says, "It is a lamentable circumstance which is proved by
   many examples, that some of those persons who were regenerated in
   Christ Jesus, have relinquished the faith, and, ceasing to preserve
   their former sanctity of manners, have apostatized from God, and their
   ungodly course has been terminated under his displeasure and aversion."
   (Ad Capita Galatians resp. 7.) (3.) The author of The Vocation of the
   Gentiles says, "God bestows the power of willing to obey him, in such a
   manner as not to take away, even from those who will persevere, that
   mutability by which it is possible for them to be unwilling [to obey
   God]. If this were not the case, none of the believers would have
   departed from the faith." (Lib. ii, c. 9.)

   2. The HARMONY OF CONFESSIONS might in the following manner, contribute
   to my defense: This dogma states that "faith is the peculiar property
   of the elect," and that "it is impossible for believers finally to
   decline from faith and salvation." Now, if this be a dogma necessary to
   salvation, then that Confession which does not contain it, or which
   asserts some thing contradictory to it, cannot be considered as
   harmonizing with the rest on the subject of religion. For wherever
   there is harmony, it is proper that there should be neither defect nor
   contradiction in things pertaining to salvation. But the Augustan or
   Lutheran Confession says that "it condemns the Anabaptists, who deny
   that those persons who have once been justified, can lose the Holy
   Spirit." Besides, Philip Melancthon with his followers, and the greater
   portion of the Lutheran Churches, are of opinion, that faith is
   bestowed even on the non-elect." Yet we are not afraid of acknowledging
   these Lutherans for brethren.

   3. The BELGIC Confession does not contain this dogma, that "faith is
   peculiar to the elect ;" and without controversy it cannot be deduced
   from our CATECHISM. For when it is said, in the article on the Church,
   "I believe that I shall perpetually remain a member of the Church;"
   and, in the first question, "God keeps and preserves me in such a
   manner, as to make all things necessarily subservient to my salvation;"
   those expressions are to be understood of a believer, in

   reference to his actual believing. For he who is truly such a

   one, answers to the character of a Christian. But no man is such except
   through faith. Faith is therefore presupposed in both the expressions.

   II. With regard to the SECOND Article, I say, that a distinction ought
   to be made between power and action. For it is one thing to declare,
   that "it is possible for the faithful to fall away from faith and
   salvation," and it is another to say, that "they do actually fall
   away." This distinction is of such extensive observance, that even
   antiquity itself was not afraid of affirming, concerning the elect and
   those who were to be saved, "that it was possible for them not to be
   saved;" and that "the mutability by which it was possible for them not
   to be willing to obey God, was not taken away from them," although it
   was the opinion of the ancients, "that such persons never would in
   reality be damned." On this very subject, too, the greater part of our
   own doctors lay down a difference. For they say, "that it is possible
   for such persons to fall away, if their nature, which is inclined to
   lapses and defection, and if the temptations of the world and Satan, be
   the only circumstances taken into consideration: but that they will not
   finally fall away, because God will bring back to himself his own elect
   before the end of life." If any one asserts, "that it is not possible
   for believers, in consideration of their being elect persons, finally
   to fall away from salvation, because God has decreed to save them," I
   answer, the decree concerning saving does not take away the possibility
   of damning, but it removes damnation itself. For "to be actually
   saved," and "a possibility of not being saved," are two things not
   contrary to each other, but in perfect agreement.

   I therefore add, that in this way I have hitherto discriminated these
   two cases. And at one time I certainly did say, with an explanation
   subjoined to it, "that it was possible for believers finally to decline
   or fall away from faith and salvation." But at no period have I
   asserted, "that believers do finally decline or fall away from faith or
   salvation." This article, therefore, is ascribed to one who is not its
   author; and it is another offense against historical veracity.

   I subjoin, that there is a vast difference between the enunciation of
   these two sentences. (1.) "It is possible for believers to decline from
   the FAITH ;" and (2.) "It is possible for believers to decline from
   SALVATION." For the latter, when rigidly and accurately examined, can
   scarcely be admitted; it being impossible for believers, as long as
   they remain believers, to decline from salvation. Because, were this
   possible, that power of God would be conquered which he has determined
   to employ in saving believers. On the other hand, if believers fall
   away from the faith and become unbelievers, it is impossible for them
   to do otherwise than decline from salvation, that is, provided they
   still continue unbelievers. Therefore, whether this hypothesis be
   granted or not, the enunciation cannot be accurately expressed. For if
   this hypothesis (their perseverance in faith) be granted, they cannot
   decline; but if it be not granted, they cannot do otherwise than
   decline. (2.) But that first enunciation includes no hypothesis; and
   therefore an answer may be given to it simply, either that it is
   possible, or that it is impossible. For this cause, the second article
   ought to be corrected in the following manner: "It is possible for
   believers finally to fall away or decline from the faith;" or rather,
   "Some believers finally fall away and decline from the faith." This
   being granted, the other can be necessarily inferred, "therefore they
   also actually decline from salvation." Respecting the truth of this
   [Second] article, I repeat the same observations which I made about the
   First. For the following expressions are reciprocal to each other, and
   regular consequences: "Faith is peculiar to the elect," and "believers
   do not finally fall away from the faith." In like manner, "Faith is not
   peculiar to the elect," and "Some believers finally decline from the
   faith."
     __________________________________________________________________

ARTICLE III

   It is a matter of doubt, whether the faith by which Abraham is said to
   be justified, was a faith in Jesus Christ who was still to come. No
   proof can be adduced of his having understood the promises of God in
   any other manner, than that he should be the heir of the world.

  ANSWER

   There are two members in this article, or rather, those members are two
   distinct articles, each of which presents itself to be separately
   considered by us, after I have observed, that in this passage no
   affirmation or negation, each of which properly constitutes a heretic,
   is attributed to us, but a mere doubt alone, that betokens a
   consciousness of ignorance and infirmity, which those who arrogate to
   themselves the knowledge of all these things, ought to endeavour to
   remove by a mild course of instruction, and not to make it a subject of
   reviling or provocation.
     __________________________________________________________________

  I. To the FIRST MEMBER I reply:

   First. I never uttered this expression; but have, on more occasions
   than one, taught both in public and private a contrary doctrine. Yet I
   remember, when a certain minister at Leyden had boasted of the
   clearness of this article, and was astonished how any persons could be
   found who entertained a different opinion about it, I told him, that
   the proof of it would not be a very easy occupation to him if he had to
   encounter a powerful adversary, and I challenged him to make a trial,
   which challenge I now repeat. I wish him to prove this assertion by
   such plain arguments, as will not leave a man just reasons for doubting
   any longer about the matter. This is a point on which the labours of a
   divine will be more profitably expended, than on publishing and
   magnifying the doubts of the infirm, whose confidence in themselves is
   not equal to that which he manifests.

   Secondly. "Faith in Christ" may be received in two acceptations. Either
   according to promise, which was involved in the types, figures and
   shadows of words and things, and proposed in that manner: Or, it is
   according to the gospel, that is clearly manifested. The difference
   between these two is so great, that with regard to it the Jews are said
   "to have been detained or kept under the law before faith came,
   concluded or shut up unto that faith which should afterwards be
   revealed." (Gal. iii. 23.) And the Apostle says, "the children of
   Israel were prevented, by the veil placed over the countenance of
   Moses, from steadfastly looking to the end of that which is abolished,"
   (2 Cor. iii. 13,) that is, to the end of the law, as is evident from
   the whole chapter, and from Romans x. 4, where Christ is said to be
   "the end of the law for righteousness to every one that believeth." Let
   the whole description of the faith of Abraham, which the Apostle gives
   at great length in Romans 4, be attentively considered, and it will
   appear, that no express mention of Jesus Christ is made in it, but it
   is implied in such a way as it is not easy for any one to explain.

   Let it be added that faith in Jesus Christ seems to some persons to be
   used by metonymy, for "that faith which is concerning the types and
   figures which adumbrate and prefigure Jesus Christ," although it has
   not united with it an understanding of those types, unless it be a very
   obscure one, and such as appears suitable to the infant Church,
   according to the economy of the times and ages which God in his wisdom
   employs. Let a comparison be instituted between that servitude under
   which the heir, so long as he is a child, is said by the Apostle to be
   held, (Gal. iv. 1-3,) and that bondage from which the Spirit of the
   Lord is declared to liberate the man whose heart is converted to Him;
   (2 Cor. iii. 16-18,) and this doubting will then be considered
   ascribable to the proper fear of a trembling [scrupulous] conscience,
   rather than to a disposition that has a powerful propensity towards
   heresy.
     __________________________________________________________________

  II. TO THE SECOND MEMBER OF THIS ARTICLE, I ANSWER:

   First. I never made such an assertion.

   Secondly. If even I had, it would not have called for any deserved
   reprehension, except from a man that was desirous by that very act to
   betray at once the weakness of his judgment and his want of experience.
   (1.) It is a sign of a judgment not the most accurate, to blame any man
   for saying that which, it is possible to prove, has been written by the
   Apostle himself in so many words. For if the heir-ship of the world was
   promised to Abraham in these words, "Thou shalt be the father of many
   nations," what wonder is there if Abraham understood the promises in no
   other manner than as they had been divinely pronounced? (2.) It is a
   mark of great inexperience in the men who framed these articles, to
   suppose that the heir-ship of the world which was promised to Abraham,
   appertained to this animal life and to carnal benefits; because the
   world of which mention is made in that passage, is that future world to
   which belongs the calling of the Gentiles, by which vocation Abraham
   was made the father of many nations. This is apparent from the
   consideration, that he is said to have been made the heir of the world
   by the righteousness of faith, of which St. Paul (Rom. iv. 13,) proves
   the Gentiles likewise to be partakers; and in Ephes. iii. 1-11, the
   Apostle treats on the vocation of the Gentiles, and says, it belongs to
   "the grace of the gospel, and to the fellowship of the mystery which
   from the beginning of the world hath been hidden in God and is now
   brought to light by Christ, by whom God created all things." I repeat
   it, that vocation does not belong to the wisdom by which God formed the
   world, but to that by which he constituted Christ his wisdom and power
   to salvation to them that believe; and by which he founded the Church,
   which will endure forever. See 1 Corinthians i. 21-23; ii, 6-8; Ephes.
   iii. 1-11. If the forgers of this article say, "that they have likewise
   perceived this, but had supposed that my opinion was different;" I
   reply, it is not the part of a prudent man to frame a foolish adversary
   for himself.
     __________________________________________________________________

ARTICLE IV

   Faith is not an effect of election, but is a necessary requisite
   foreseen by God in those who are to be elected. And the decree
   concerning the bestowing of faith precedes the decree of election.

  ANSWER

   Of this article also there are two entire members:

   I. In the FIRST of them, three assertions are included. (1.)

   "Faith is not an effect of election." (2.) "Faith is a necessary
   requisite in those who are to be elected or saved." (3.) "This
   requisite is foreseen by God in the persons to be elected." I confess,
   all these, when rightly understood and correctly explained, agree
   entirely with my opinion, on the subject. But the last of the members
   is proposed in terms too odious, since it makes no mention of God,
   whose benefit and gift I acknowledge faith to be.

   I will now proceed to explain myself on each of these assertions:

   1. With regard to the FIRST, the word "Election" is ambiguous. For it
   either signifies "the election by which God determines to justify
   believers, while those who are unbelievers or workers are rejected from
   righteousness and salvation: "Or it signifies "the election by which he
   determines to save certain particular persons, as such, and to bestow
   faith on them in order to their salvation, other particular persons
   being also rejected, merely in reference to their being such particular
   individuals." Election is received according to this latter
   signification, by those who charge me with these articles. I take it in
   the former acceptation, according to Romans ix. 11: "For the children
   being not yet born, neither having done any good or evil, that the
   purpose of God according to election might stand, not of works, but of
   Him that calleth, it was said unto her, the elder shall serve the
   younger."

   I will not now enter into a prolix disputation, whether or not the
   sense in which I receive it, be the correct one. It is evident, at
   least, that there is some decree of God by which he determines to
   justify believers; and which, since it excludes unbelievers from
   righteousness and salvation, is appropriately called "the decree
   according to election" or "with election," as being that which does not
   include all men within its embrace. This decree I consider as the
   foundation of Christianity, of man's salvation, and of his assurance of
   salvation; and it is this of which the Apostle treats in the ninth,
   tenth and eleventh chapters of his Epistle to the Romans, and in the
   first chapter to the Ephesians.

   But I have not yet declared what my sentiments in general are about
   that decree by which God is said "to have determined absolutely to save
   certain particular persons, and to bestow faith upon them in order to
   their salvation, while others are reprobated from salvation and faith;"
   although I have confessed, that there is a certain decree of God,
   according to which he determines to administer the means to faith and
   salvation, as he knows them to be suitable and proper to his
   righteousness, mercy and severity. From these premises it is deduced as
   a most manifest consequence, that faith is not an effect of that
   election by which God determines to justify those who believe.

   2. With regard to the SECOND assertion, from the particulars thus
   explained it is concluded, that "faith is a necessary requisite in
   those who shall be partakers of salvation according to the election of
   God ;" or, that "it is a condition prescribed and required by God, to
   be performed by those who shall obtain his salvation." "This is the
   will of God, that whosoever believeth in the Son hath eternal life; he
   that believeth not, shall be condemned." The propositions contained in
   this passage cannot be resolved into any other than this brief one,
   which is likewise used in the Scripture, "Believe, and thou shalt be
   saved." In which the word "believe" has the force of a demand or
   requirement; and the phrase "thou shalt be saved" has that of a
   suasion, by means of a good that is promised. This truth is so clear
   and perspicuous, that the denial of it would be a proof of great
   perversity or of extreme unskilfullness. If any one say, "It is a
   condition, but yet an evangelical one, which God may himself perform in
   us, or, (as it is better expressed,) which he may by his grace cause us
   to perform; "the man who speaks thus, does not contradict this truth,
   but confirms it when he adds this explanation, "of what description
   soever that condition may be."

   3. With regard to the THIRD, I say that we must distinguish between the
   condition by which it is required, that by which it is performed, and
   that by which it is seen or foreseen as performed. This third member,
   therefore, is proposed in a manner much too confused. Yet, when this
   confusion is corrected by the distinction which we have stated, nothing
   of absurdity will be apparent even in that member. Because foreseeing
   or seeing, in the very nature and order of things follows the
   performance itself; the performance has its own causes into which it is
   to be resolved; and the efficiency of those causes is not necessary,
   unless faith be prescribed and required by the law of faith and the
   gospel. Since therefore faith is said "to be foreseen by God in those
   who are to be saved," those causes, without the intervention of which
   there could be no faith, are not removed, but are rather appointed.
   Among those causes, I consider the preventing, accompanying and
   succeeding [subsequent] grace of God, as the principal. And I say, with
   Fulgentius, "Those persons will be saved, or they have been
   predestinated and elected, who, God foreknew, would believe by the
   assistance of his preventing grace, (I add and of his accompanying
   grace,) and would persevere by the aid of his subsequent grace." In
   this first member, then, there is nothing except truth of the greatest
   purity.

   II. The second member is, "The decree concerning the gift of faith,
   precedes the decree of election;" in the explanation of which I employ
   the same distinction as in the former, and say, "The decree of
   election, by which God determines to justify and save believers,
   precedes the decree concerning the bestowment of faith." For faith is
   unnecessary, nay it is useless, without this previous decree. And the
   decree of election, by which God resolves to justify and save this or
   that particular person, is subsequent to that decree according to which
   he determines to administer the means necessary and efficacious to
   faith, that is, the decree concerning the gift of faith.

   If any one says, "God wills first absolutely to save some particular
   person; and, since he wills that, he also wills to bestow faith on him,
   because without faith, it is not possible for him to be saved." I tell
   him, that he lays down contradictory propositions--that "God wills
   absolutely to save some one without regard to faith," and yet that,
   "according to the will of God, he cannot be saved without faith."
   Through the will of God it has been revealed to us, without faith it is
   impossible for any man to please God, or to be saved. There is,
   therefore, in God no other will, by which he wills any one to be
   absolutely saved without consideration of faith. For contradictory
   wills cannot be attributed to God. If any person replies, "God wills
   the end before he wills the means leading to the end; but salvation is
   the end, and faith the means leading to the end," I answer, first,
   Salvation is not the end of God; but salvation and faith are the gifts
   of God, bound and connected together in this order between themselves
   through the will of God, that faith should precede salvation, both with
   regard to God, the donor of it; and in reality. Secondly. Faith is a
   CONDITION required by God to be performed by him who shall be saved,
   before it is MEANS of obtaining that salvation. Since God will not
   bestow salvation on any one, except on him who believes, man is on this
   account incited to be willing to believe, because he knows that his
   chief good is placed in salvation. Man, therefore, tried by faith, as
   the means, to attain to salvation as the end; because he knows that he
   cannot possibly obtain salvation except through that means. And this
   knowledge he does not acquire except through the declaration of the
   divine Will, by which God requires faith from those who wish to be
   saved, that is, by which he places faith as a condition in the object,
   that is, in the person to be saved.
     __________________________________________________________________

ARTICLE V

   Naught among things contingent can be said to be NECESSARILY done in
   respect to the Divine decree.

  ANSWER

   My opinion concerning Necessity and Contingency is "that they can never
   be applicable at once to one and the same event." But I speak of the
   necessity and contingency that are both of the same kind, not those
   which are different in their genus. The schoolmen state, that there is
   one necessitas consequentis--an absolute necessity -- , and another,
   necessitas consequenti--a hypothetical necessity. The former is, when
   the necessity arises from a cause antecedent to the thing itself. But
   necessitas consequenti--a hypothetical necessity--arises from certain
   premises, or principles, antecedent to the conclusion. A consequent, or
   absolute contingency cannot consist with a consequent, or absolute
   necessity; nor can they meet together in one event. In the same manner,
   one conclusion cannot be both necessary and contingent in regard to its
   consequence; that is, it cannot have, at the same time, a necessity and
   a contingency that are hypothetical. But the cause why one thing cannot
   be necessary and contingent at the same time, is this "that what is
   necessary, and what is contingent, divide the whole amplitude of being.
   For every being is either necessary or contingent. But those things
   which divide the whole of being, cannot coincide or meet together in
   any single being. Otherwise they would not divide the whole range of
   being. What is contingent, and what is necessary, likewise, differ in
   their entire essences and in the whole of their definition. For that is
   necessary which cannot possibly not be or not be done. And that is
   contingent which is possible not to be or to be done. Thus
   contradictorily are they opposed to each other; and this opposition is
   infinite, and, therefore, always dividing truth from falsehood: as,
   "this thing is either a man or it is not a man;" it is not possible for
   any thing to be both of these at once--that is, it is impossible for
   any thing of one essence. Otherwise, in another sense," Christ is a
   man," as proceeding from his mother, Mary; "he is not a man," in
   reference to his having been begotten of the Father from all eternity;
   but these are two things and two natures.

   But they say: "It is possible for one and the same event to be
   necessary and contingent in different respects--necessary with regard
   to the first cause, which is God--and contingent in respect to second
   causes." I answer, FIRST. Those things which differ in their entire
   essences, do not coincide in respects. SECONDLY. The necessity or
   contingency of an event is to be estimated, not from one cause, but
   from all the causes united together. For after ten causes have been
   fixed, from which a thing is produced, not necessarily but
   contingently, if one be added from which the thing may be necessarily
   completed, the whole of that thing is said to have been done not
   contingently but necessarily. Because, when all these causes were
   together appointed, it was impossible for that thing to hinder itself
   from being produced, and from being brought into existence. That thing,
   I confess indeed, when distinctly compared by our mind with each of its
   causes, has a different relation to them respectively. But since none
   of those causes is the total cause of that event, and since all of them
   united together form the total cause, the thing ought itself to be
   accounted and declared to have been done from that total cause, either
   necessarily or contingently.

   It is not only a rash saying, but a false and an ignorant one, "that a
   thing which, in regard to second causes, is done contingently is said
   to be done necessarily in regard to the divine decree." For the divine
   decree itself, being an internal action of God, is not immediately the
   cause of the thing; but, whatever effects it may produce, it performs
   them by power, according to the mode of which a thing will be said to
   be either necessarily or contingently. For if God resolve to use an
   irresistible power in the execution of his decree, or if he determine
   to employ such a quantum of power as nothing can resist or can hinder
   it from completing his purpose, it will follow that the thing will
   necessarily be brought into existence. Thus, "wicked men who persevere
   in their sins, will necessarily perish," for God will by an
   irresistible force, cast them down into the depths of hell. But if he
   resolve to use a force that is not irresistible, but that can be
   resisted by the creature, then that thing is said to be done, not
   necessarily but contingently, although its actual occurrence was
   certainly foreknown by God, according to the infinity of his
   understanding, by which he knows all results whatever, that will arise
   from certain causes which are laid down, and whether those causes
   produce a thing necessarily or contingently. From whence the school-men
   say that "all things are done by a necessity of infallibility," which
   phrase is used in a determinate sense, although the words in which its
   enunciation is expressed are ill-chosen. For infallibility is not an
   affection of a being, which exists from causes; but it is an affection
   of a Mind that sees or that foresees what will be the effect of certain
   causes. But I readily endure a catachrestic metalepsis, when it is
   evident concerning a thing, although it is my wish that our
   enunciations were always the best accommodated to the natures of the
   things themselves.

   But the inventors of these articles try to prove by the examples which
   they produce, that "one and the same thing, which, with respect to
   second causes, is done contingently, is, in respect to the Divine
   Decree, done necessarily." They say "It was possible for the bones of
   Christ to be broken, or not to be broken. It was possible for them to
   be broken, if any person considers the nature of bones; for they were
   undoubtedly fragile. But they could not be broken, if the decree of God
   be taken into the account." In answer to this, I deny that in respect
   of the DIVINE DECREE, they could not be broken. For God did not decree
   that it was impossible for them to be broken, but that they should not
   be broken. This is apparent from the manner in which the transaction
   was actually conducted. For God did not employ an irresistible power by
   which he might prevent the bones of Christ from being broken by those
   who approached to break them; but by a mild kind of suasion, he caused
   that they should not will to break the bones of Christ, by an argument
   drawn from its inutility. For, since Christ had already given up the
   ghost, before those who broke the legs had arrived at the cross, they
   were not at all inclined to undertake a vain and fruitless labour in
   breaking the legs of our saviour. Because the breaking of legs, with
   the design to hasten death, was only done lest the bodies should remain
   suspended on the cross on a festival or sacred day, contrary to the
   divine law. Indeed, if the divine Wisdom knows how to effect that which
   it has decreed, by employing causes according to their nature and
   motion--whether their nature and motion be contingent or free, the
   praise due to such Wisdom is far greater than if it employ a power
   which no creature can possibly resist. Although God can employ such a
   power whensoever it may seem expedient to his Wisdom. I am therefore,
   of opinion that I committed no offense when I said, "No contingent
   thing--that is, nothing which is done or has been done
   CONTINGENTLY--can be said to be or have been done NECESSARILY, with
   regard to the divine decree."
     __________________________________________________________________

ARTICLE VI

   All things are done contingently.

  ANSWER

   This Article is expressed in such a stupid and senseless manner, that
   they who attribute it to me, declare by this very circumstance, that
   they do not perceive under how many falsities this expression labours;
   nay, they do not understand what is the meaning of the words which they
   employ. For if that is said to be done contingently which it is
   possible not to do, or which may not be done, after all the causes
   required for its being done have been fixed; and, on the other hand, if
   that is said to be done necessarily which cannot be left undone which
   cannot but be done-after all the causes required for its performance
   have been fixed; and if I grant, that, after some causes have been
   fixed, it is impossible for any other event to ensue than that the
   thing should be done and exist, how then can I be of opinion that" all
   things are done, or happen, contingently?." But they have deceived
   themselves by their own ignorance; from which it would be possible for
   them to be liberated, if they would bestow a becoming and proper
   attention on sentiments that are more correct, and would in a friendly
   manner obtain from the author a knowledge of his views and opinions.

   I have both declared and taught that "necessity, in reference to its
   being said to be or to happen necessarily, is either absolute or
   relative." It is an absolute necessity, in relation to a thing being
   said simply "to be or to happen necessarily," without any regard being
   had to the supposition, or laying down, of any cause whatever. It is a
   relative necessity, when a thing is said "to be or to happen
   necessarily," after some cause had been laid down or fixed. Thus, God
   exists by an absolute necessity; and by the same absolute necessity, he
   both understands and loves himself. But the world, and all things
   produced from it, are, according to an absolute consideration,
   contingent, and are produced contingently by God, freely operating. But
   it being granted that God wills to form the world by his infinite
   power, to which NOTHING ITSELF must be equal to matter in the most
   perfect state of preparation--and it being likewise granted that God
   actually employs this power--it will then be said, "It was impossible
   for the world to do otherwise than exist from this cause;" or, "from
   this cause, the world could not but exist." And this is a relative
   necessity, which is so called from the hypothesis of an antecedent
   cause being laid down or fixed.

   I will explain my meaning in a different manner. Two things in this
   place come under our consideration, the CAUSE and the EFFECT. If both
   of them be necessarily fixed, that is, if not only the effect be fixed
   necessarily when the cause fixed, but if the cause also necessarily
   exist and be necessarily supposed to operate, the necessity of the
   effect is in that case simple and absolute. In this manner arises the
   absolute necessity of the Divine effect, by which God is said to know
   and love himself; for the Divine understanding and the Divine will
   cannot be inoperative, [cannot but operate]. This operation of God is
   not only an internal one, but it is also ad intra, [inwards,] tending
   towards an object, which is himself. But whatever God may do ad extra,
   [externally,] that is, when acting on an object which is something
   beside himself, [or something different from himself,] whether this
   object be united to him in understanding and he tend towards it by an
   internal act, or whether it be in reality separated from him and
   towards which he tends by an external act, the whole of this he does
   freely, and the whole of it is, therefore, said to be absolutely
   contingent. Thus God freely decreed to form the world, and did freely
   form it. And, in this sense, all things are done contingently in
   respect to the ]Divine decree; because no necessity exists why the
   decree of God should be appointed, since it proceeds from his own pure
   and free [or unconstrained] will.

   Or, to express it in another form: That is called the simple and
   absolute necessity of any effect, "when the cause necessarily exists,
   necessarily operates, and employs that power through which it is
   impossible for the thing not to exist," [or through which it cannot but
   exist]. In the nature of things, such an effect as this cannot be
   contemplated. For the intellect of the Deity, by which he understands
   himself, proceeds from a cause that necessarily exists and that
   necessarily understands itself; but it does not proceed from a cause
   which employs a power of action for such an understanding.

   Under this consideration, the relative necessity of any event is
   two-fold. FIRST. When a cause that necessarily exists, but does not
   necessarily operate, uses a power of action that cannot be resisted.
   Thus it being fixed, that "God, who is a necessary being, wills to
   create a world by his omnipotence," a world must in that case
   necessarily come into existence. SECONDLY. When a cause that does not
   necessarily exist and yet necessarily operates, acts with such efficacy
   as is impossible to be resisted by the matter or subject on which it
   operates. Thus, straw is said to be necessarily burnt [or consumed] by
   the fire, if it be cast into the flame. Because it is impossible either
   for the fire to restrain its power of burning so as not actually to
   burn, or for the straw to resist the fire. But because God can prevent
   the fire from burning any combustible matter that is brought near it or
   put into it, this kind of necessity is called partial in respect to the
   cause, and only according to the nature of the things themselves and
   the mutual affection [or relation] between them.

   When these matters have been thus explained, I could wish to see what
   can possibly be said in opposition.lam desirous, that we should in
   preference contend FOR THE NECESSITY OF GOD ALONE, that is, for his
   necessary existence and for the necessary production of his ad intra
   [internal] acts, and that we should contend for the CONTINGENCY OF ALL
   OTHER THINGS AND EFFECTS. Such a procedure on our part would conduce
   far more to the glory of God; to whom by this method would be
   attributed both the GLORY of his necessary existence, that is, of his
   eternity, according to which it is a pure act without [the exercise of]
   power, and the GLORY of his free creation of all other things, by which
   also his goodness becomes a supreme object of our commendation.
     __________________________________________________________________

ARTICLE VII

   God has not by his eternal decree determined future and contingent
   things to the one part or the other.

  ANSWER

   A calumny which lies concealed under ambiguous terms, is capable of
   inflicting a deep injury with the greatest security; but after such
   equivocal expressions are explained, the slander is exposed, and loses
   all its force among men of skill and experience.

   The word "DETERMINED" is of this ambiguous description. For it
   signifies (1.) either "the determination of God by which he resolves
   that something shall be done; and when such a determination is fixed,
   (by an action, motion and impulse of God, of whatever kind it may be,)
   the second cause, both with regard to its power and the use of that
   power, remains free either to act or not to act, so that, if it be the
   pleasure of this second cause, it can suspend [or defer] its own
   action." Or it signifies (2.) "such a determination, as, when once it
   is fixed, the second cause (at least in regard to the use of its
   power,) remains no longer free so as to be able to suspend its own
   action, when God's action, motion and impulse have been fixed; but by
   this determination, it [the second cause] is necessarily bent or
   inclined to the one course or the other, all indifference to either
   part being completely removed before this determined act be produced by
   a free and unconstrained creature."

   1. If the word "DETERMINED," in the article here proposed, be
   interpreted according to this first method, far be it from me to deny
   such a sort of Divine determination. For I am aware that it is said, in
   the fourth chapter of the. Acts of the Apostles, "Both Herod and
   Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and the people of Israel, were
   gathered together against Jesus, to do whatsoever God's hand and
   counsel determined before (or previously appointed) to be done." But I
   also know, that Herod, Pontius Pilate, and the Jews, freely performed
   those very actions; and (notwithstanding this "fore-determination of
   God," and though by his power every Divine action, motion and impulse
   which was necessary for the execution of this "fore-determination,"
   were all fixed,) yet it was possible for this act (the crucifixion of
   Christ,) which had been "previously appointed" by God, not to be
   produced by those persons, and they might have remained free and
   indifferent to the performance of this action, up to the moment of time
   in which they perpetrated the deed. Let the narrative of the passion of
   our Lord be perused, and let it be observed how the whole matter was
   conducted, by what arguments Herod, Pontius Pilate and the Jews were
   moved and induced, and the kind of administration [or management] that
   was employed in the use of those arguments, and it will then be
   evident, that it is the truth which I here assert.

   2. But if the word "DETERMINED" be received according to the second
   acceptation, I confess, that I abominate and detest that axiom (as one
   that is FALSE, ABSURD, and preparing the way for MANY BLASPHEMIES,)
   which, declares that "God by his eternal decree has determined to the
   one part or to the other future contingent things." By this last phrase
   understand "those things which are performed by the free will of the
   creature."

   (1.) I execrate it as a FALSEHOOD: Because God in the administration of
   his Providence conducts all things in such a manner that when he is
   pleased to employ his creatures in the execution of his decrees, he
   does not take away from them their nature, natural properties or the
   use of them, but allows them to perform and complete their own proper
   motions. Were it otherwise, Divine Providence, which ought to be
   accommodated to the creation, would be in direct opposition.

   (2.) I detest it as AN ABSURDITY: Because it is contradictory in the
   adjunct, that "something is done contingently," that is, it is done in
   such a manner as makes it POSSIBLE not to be done; and yet this same
   thing is determined to the one part or the other in such a manner, as
   makes it IMPOSSIBLE to leave undone that which has been determined to
   be done. What the patrons of such a doctrine advance about "that
   liberty not being taken away which belongs to the nature of the
   creature," is not sufficient to destroy this contradiction:

   Because it is not sufficient for the establishment of contingency and
   liberty to have the presence of a power which can freely act according
   to nature; but it is requisite that the use and employment of that
   power and liberty should on no account be impeded. What insanity
   therefore is it, [according to the scheme of these men,] to confer at
   the creation a power on the creature of acting freely or of suspending
   its action, and yet to take away the use of such a power when the
   liberty comes at length to be employed. That is, to grant it when there
   is no use for it, but when it becomes both useful and necessary, then
   in the very act to prevent the exercise of its liberty. Let Tertullian
   against Marcion be examined, (lib. ii. c. 5, 6, 7,) where he discusses
   this matter in a most erudite and nervous manner. I yield my full
   assent to all that he advances.

   (3.) I abhor it as CONDUCING TO MULTIPLIED BLASPHEMIES. For I consider
   it impossible for any art or sophistry to prevent this dogma concerning
   "such a previous determination" from producing the following
   consequences: FIRST. It makes God to be the author of sin, and man to
   be exempt from blame. SECONDLY. It constitutes God as the real, proper
   and only sinner: Because when there is a fixed law which forbids this
   act, and when there is such "a fore-determination" as makes it
   "impossible for this act not to be committed," it follows as a natural
   consequence, that it is God himself who transgresses the law, since he
   is the person who performs this deed against the law. For though this
   be immediately perpetrated by the creature, yet, with regard to it, the
   creature cannot have any consideration of sin; because this act was
   unavoidable on the part of man, after such "fore-determination" had
   been fixed. THIRDLY. Because, according to this dogma, God needed
   sinful man and his sin, for the illustration of his justice and mercy.
   FOURTHLY. And, from its terms, sin is no longer sin.

   I never yet saw a refutation of those consequences which have been
   deduced from this dogma by some other persons. I wish such a refutation
   was prepared, at least that it would be seriously attempted. When it is
   completed, if I am not able to demonstrate, even then, that these
   objections of mine are not removed, I will own myself to be vanquished,
   and will ask pardon for my offense. Although I am not accustomed to
   charge and oppress this sentiment [of theirs] with such consequences
   before other people, yet I usually confess this single circumstance,
   (and this, only when urged by necessity,) that "I cannot possibly free
   their opinion from those objections."
     __________________________________________________________________

ARTICLE VIII

   Sufficient grace of the Holy Spirit is bestowed on those to whom the
   gospel is preached, whosoever they may be; so that, if they will, they
   may believe: otherwise, God would only be mocking mankind.

  ANSWER

   At no time, either in public or in private, have I delivered this
   proposition in these words, or in any expressions that were of
   equivalent force, or that conveyed a similar meaning. This assertion I
   confidently make, even though a great number of persons might bear a
   contrary testimony. Because, unless this Article received a modified
   explanation, I neither approve of it at present, nor has it at any time
   obtained any portion of my approval. Of this fact it is in my power to
   afford evidence, from written conferences which I have had with other
   people on the same subject.

   In this Article there are three topics concerning which I am desirous
   of giving a suitable explanation.

   FIRST. Concerning the difference which subsists among the persons to
   whom the gospel is preached. Frequent mention of this difference is
   made in the scriptures, and particularly in the following passages. "I
   thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou hast hid
   these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto
   babes." (Matt. xi. 25.) The explanation of these words may be
   discovered in 1 Corinthians 1 and 2. "Into whatsoever city or town ye
   shall enter, inquire who in it is worthy; and there abide till ye go
   thence. And when ye come into a house, salute it. And if the house be
   worthy, let your peace come upon it; but. if it be not worthy, let your
   peace return to you." (Matt. x. 11-13.) The Jews of Berea "were more
   noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they received the word with
   all readiness of mind," &c. (Acts xvii. 11.) "Pray for us, that the
   word of the Lord may have free course, and be glorified, even as it is
   with you; and that we may be delivered from unreasonable and wicked
   men. For all men have not faith. But the Lord is faithful," &c. (2
   Thess. iii. 1, 2.)

   SECONDLY. Concerning the bestowing of sufficient grace what is to be
   understood by such a gift? It is well known, that there is habitual
   grace, and [the grace of] assistance. Now the phraseology of the
   article might be understood according to this acceptation, as though
   some kind of habitual grace were infused into all those to whom the
   gospel is preached, which would render them apt or inclined to give it
   credence, or believe the gospel. But this interpretation of the. phrase
   is one of which I do not approve. But this SUFFICIENCY, after all that
   is said about it, must, in my opinion, be ascribed to the assistance of
   the Holy Spirit, by which he assists the preaching of the gospel, as
   the organ, or instrument, by which He, the Holy Spirit, is accustomed
   to be efficacious in the hearts of the hearers. But it is possible to
   explain this operation of the assistance of the Holy Spirit, in a
   manner so modified and appropriate, and such sufficiency may be
   ascribed to it, as to keep at the greatest possible distance from
   Pelagianism.

   THIRDLY. Concerning the expression, "By this grace they may believe, if
   they will." These words, when delivered in such a crude and undigested
   form, are capable of being brought to bear a very bad interpretation,
   and a meaning not at all agreeable to the scriptures, as though, after
   that power had been bestowed, the Holy Spirit and Divine Grace remain
   entirely quiescent, waiting to see whether the man will properly use
   the power which he has received, and will believe the gospel. When, on
   the contrary, he who wishes to entertain and to utter correct
   sentiments on this subject, will account it necessary to ascribe to
   Grace its own province, which, indeed, is the principal one, in
   persuading the human will that it may be inclined to yield assent to
   those truths which are preached.

   This exposition completely frees me from the slightest suspicion of
   heresy on the point here mentioned; and proves it to be a report not
   entitled to the least credit, that I have employed such expressions, as
   I am unwilling to admit, except with the addition of a sound and proper
   explanation.

   In reference to the REASON which is appended to this proposition, that,
   otherwise, God would only be mocking mankind, I confess it to be a
   remark which several adversaries employ against the opinion entertained
   by many of our divines, to convict it of absurdity. And it is not used
   without just cause, which might easily have been demonstrated, had it
   pleased the inventors of these Articles, (instead of ascribing them to
   me,) to occupy themselves in openly declaring on this subject their own
   sentiments, which they keep carefully concealed within their own
   bosoms.
     __________________________________________________________________

ARTICLE IX

   The temporal afflictions of believers are not correctly termed
   "CHASTISEMENTS," but are PUNISHMENTS for sins. For Christ has rendered
   satisfaction only for eternal punishments.

  ANSWER

   This Article is attributed to me by a double and most flagrant
   falsehood: the first of which will be found in the Article itself, and
   the second in the reason appended.

   1. Concerning the FIRST. Those who are mere novices in Divinity know
   that the afflictions and calamities of this animal life, are either
   punishments, chastisements, or trials. That is, in sending them, God
   either intends punishment for sins, in regard to their having been
   already committed, and without any other consideration; or, He intends
   chastisement, that those who are the subjects of it may not afterwards
   fall into the commission of other or similar offenses; or, in sending
   afflictions and calamities, God purposes to try the faith, hope,
   charity, patience, and the like conspicuous virtues and graces of his
   people. What man would be so silly as to say, when the Apostles were
   called before the Jewish Council, and were beaten with rods, that "it
   was a PUNISHMENT!" although "they departed from the presence of the
   Council, that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his name."
   (Acts v. 41.) Is not the following expression of the Apostle familiar
   to every one? "For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and
   many sleep. For if we would judge ourselves, we should not be judged.
   But when we are judged, we are CHASTENED, (reproved and instructed,) OF
   THE LORD, that we should not be condemned with the world." (1 Cor. xi.
   30-32.) By not reflecting on these and similar passages of scripture,
   the persons who attributed these articles to me betrayed their
   ignorance, as well as their audacity. If they had bestowed the least
   reflection upon such texts, by what strange infatuation of mind has it
   happened, that they ascribe to me a sentiment which is thus confuted by
   plain and obvious quotations from the word of God?

   On one occasion, when the subject of discussion was the calamities
   inflicted on the house of David on account of criminal conduct towards
   Uriah; and when the passages of scripture which were adduced tended
   with great semblance of truth to prove, that those calamities bore some
   relation to PUNISHMENT, I stated, that "no necessity whatever existed
   for as to allow ourselves to be brought into such straits by our
   adversaries the Papists, from which we could with difficulty escape;
   since the words appear to make against the opinion which asserts that
   they have by no means any reference to punishment. And because sin
   merits both an eternal punishment corresponding with its grievous
   enormity, and a temporal punishment, (if indeed God be pleased to
   inflict the latter, which is not always his practice even with respect
   to those who persevere in their transgressions, as may be seen in Psalm
   73, and Job 21,) it might, not unseasonably, be said, that, after God
   has pardoned the guilt so far as it is meritorious of eternal
   punishment, he reserves or retains it in reference to temporal
   punishment." And I shewed, that, "from these premises, no patronage
   could be obtained for the Popish dogma of a Purgatory," which was the
   subject of that discussion.

   2. With regard to the REASON appended, it is supported by the same
   criminal falsehood as the preceding part of the Article, and with no
   less absurdity of object, as I will demonstrate. For I affirm, in the
   first place, that this expression at no time escaped from my lips, and
   that such a thought never entered my imagination. My opinion on this
   subject is, "Christ is our Redeemer and saviour from sins, which merit
   both temporal and eternal death; and He delivers us not only from death
   eternal, but from death temporal, which is the separation of the soul
   from the body." But it is amazing, that this opinion "Christ has
   rendered satisfaction for temporal punishments alone," could possibly
   have been attributed to me by men of discretion, when the scriptures
   expressly declare, "Christ was also a partaker of flesh and blood,
   that, through death, he might destroy him that had the power of death,
   that is, the devil." (Heb. ii. 14.) By the term DEATH in this place
   must be understood either "the death of the body alone," or "that in
   conjunction with eternal death. "The Son of God was manifested, that he
   might destroy the works of the devil." (1 John iii. 8.) And among those
   works to be destroyed, we must reckon death temporal. For "by the envy
   of the devil, death entered into the world." In another passage it is
   said, "For since by man came death, by MAN came also the resurrection
   of the dead;" this man is Christ. (1 Cor. xv. 21.) "Christ shall change
   our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body,
   according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things
   unto himself." (Phil. iii. 21.) The greatest necessity exists for that
   man to become conversant with the scriptures, who denies, that "by the
   death, of Christ we are redeemed from temporal death, and obtain a
   right and title to a happy resurrection."

   The following is an affirmation which I have made: "We are not actually
   delivered from temporal death, except by the resurrection from the
   dead, through which our last enemy, death, will be destroyed. These two
   truths, therefore, are, in my judgment, to be considered and taught,
   (1.) Christ, by his death, immediately took away from death the
   authority or right which he had over us, that of detaining us under his
   power, even as it was not possible that Christ himself should be holden
   by t]he bonds [pains] of death. (Acts ii. 24.) But (2.) Christ will in
   his own time deliver us from its actual dominion, according to the
   administration or appointment of God, whose pleasure it is to concede
   to the soul an early period of liberation, and to the body one that is
   later." But, I confess, that I cannot with an unwavering conscience
   assert, and therefore, dare not do it as if it were an object of
   certain knowledge, that temporal death, which is imposed or inflicted
   on the saints, is not a punishment, or has no regard to punishment,"
   when it is styled "an ENEMY that is to be destroyed" by the Omnipotence
   of Christ.

   The contrary opinion to this is not proved by the argument, that "our
   corporeal death is a passage into eternal life:" because it is a
   passage of the soul, and not of the body; the latter of which, while it
   remains buried in the earth, is held under the dominion of death. Nor
   is it established by the remark that "the saints long for the death of
   the body." (Phil. i. 21, 23.) For when they "have a desire to be
   dissolved [to depart] and be with Christ," that desire is according to
   the soul; the body in the mean time remaining under the dominion of
   death its enemy, until it likewise, (after being again united to its
   own soul,) be glorified with it. The address of Christ to Peter may
   also be stated in opposition: "When thou shalt be old, thou shalt
   stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee
   whither thou wildest not. This spake he, signifying by what death he
   should glorify God." (John xxi. 19.)

   The framers of these articles, therefore, have imputed this opinion to
   me, not only without truth, but without a sufficient sanction from
   their own discretion. Of this weakness of their judgment I observe, in
   this Article, other two tokens:

   FIRST. They do not distinguish between the magnitude of each error in a
   proper manner. For he falls into a far greater error who DENIES, that
   "Christ has rendered satisfaction for corporeal punishments," that is,
   for the punishment of death temporal, than is his who ASSENTS, that
   "the death of the body has regard to punishment, since it is inflicted
   even on holy persons." But they have placed the latter error as the
   proposition; and the former one is brought, as a reason, for its
   confirmation. When they ought to have adopted an opposite mode of
   stating them, according to the relative estimate of each of these
   errors thus, "Christ has rendered satisfaction for eternal punishment
   alone. Therefore, the temporal afflictions of believers are not
   correctly called chastisements, but are punishments for sins."

   SECONDLY. Because they make me employ an argument, which I cannot
   discover to be possessed of any force towards proving the proposition.
   For I grant, that Christ has rendered satisfaction even for temporal
   punishments; and yet I say, "It may likewise be true that temporal
   death has a reference to PUNISHMENT, even when it is inflicted on
   believers."

   THIRDLY. From these considerations, a third mark of an inconstant and
   wavering judgment discovers itself. For when they employ this mode of
   argumentation, "Christ has liberated us from temporal punishments.
   Therefore our death cannot have any respect to punishment," they do not
   perceive that I might with equal facility draw from the same premises
   the following conclusion, "Therefore, it is not equitable that the
   saints should die a temporal death." My method of reasoning is [direct]
   a re ad rem, from subject to subject, "Because Christ has borne the
   death of the body, it is not to be borne by us." Their method is
   [relative] a re ad respectum rei, from the subject to its relation,
   thus, "Because Christ has borne the death of the body, it is indeed
   inflicted on us, but not so as to have any reference to punishment."

   God will himself approve and verify this argument a re ad rem, from
   subject to subject, by the effect which He will give to it at some
   future period. But the argument will be prepared and stated in a
   legitimate form, thus, "Christ has borne the death of the body; and,
   (secondly,) has taken it away, which fact is apparent from his
   resurrection. Therefore, God will take away death from us in his own
   good time."
     __________________________________________________________________

ARTICLE X

   It cannot be proved from Scripture, that believers under the Old
   Testament, before the ascension of Christ, were in Heaven.

  ANSWER

   I never taught such a doctrine as this in public, and I never asserted
   it affirmatively in private. I recollect, however, that I said, on one
   occasion, to a minister of God's word, in reference to a sermon which
   he had then delivered, "there are many passages of Scripture which seem
   to prove, that believers under the Old Testament, before the ascension
   of Christ, were not in Heaven." I produced some of those passages,
   against which he had little to object. But I added, that I thought it
   could not now be propounded with much usefulness to any church that
   held a contrary opinion; but that, after it has been diligently
   examined and found to be true, it may be taught with profit to the
   church and to the glory of Christ, when the minds of men have been duly
   prepared. I am still of the same opinion. But, about the matter itself,
   I affirm nothing on either side. I perceive that each of these views of
   the subject has arguments in its favour, not only in passages of
   scripture and in conclusions deduced from them, but likewise in the
   sentiments of divines. Having investigated all of them to the best of
   my ability, I confess that I hesitate, and declare that neither view
   seems to me to be very evident [or to have the preponderance.] In this
   opinion I have the assent of a vast majority of divines, especially
   those of our own age. Most of the Christian Fathers place the souls of
   the Patriarchs under the Old Testament beyond or out of Heaven, either
   in the lower regions, in Purgatory, or in some other place, which yet
   is situated out of the verge of what is properly called Heaven. With
   St. Augustine, therefore, "I prefer doubting about secret things, to
   litigation about those which are uncertain." Nor is there the least
   necessity. For why should I, in these our days, when Christ, by his
   ascension into Heaven, having become our Forerunner, hath opened for us
   a way and entrance into that holy place, why should I now contend about
   the place in which the souls of the Fathers rested in the times of the
   Old Testament?

   But lest, as is usual in my case, a calumnious report should be raised
   on the consequences to be deduced from this opinion, as though I was
   favourable to the Popish dogma of a Purgatory, or as though I approach
   nearly to those who think that the souls of the dead sleep or have
   slept, or, which is the worst of all, as though I seem to identify
   myself with those who say, "the Fathers were like swine that were fed
   and fattened without any hope of a better life," lest such reports as
   these should be fabricated, I will openly declare what my opinion is
   about the state of the Fathers prior to Christ's ascension into Heaven.
   (1.) I believe that human souls are immortal, that is, they will never
   die. (2.) From this I deduce, that souls do not sleep. (3.) That, after
   this life, a state of felicity or of misery is opened for all men, into
   the one or the other of which they enter immediately on their departure
   out of this world. (4.) That the souls of the Fathers, who passed their
   days of sojourning on earth in faith and in waiting for the Redeemer,
   departed into a place of quiet, joy, and blessedness, and began to
   enjoy the blissful presence of God, as soon as they escaped out of the
   body. (5.) I dare not venture to determine where that place of quiet is
   situated, whether in Heaven, properly so called, into which Christ
   ascended, or somewhere out of it. If any other person be more
   adventurous on this subject, I think he ought to be required to produce
   reasons for his opinion, or be enjoined to keep silence. (6.) I add,
   that, in my opinion, the felicity of those souls was much increased by
   the ascension of Christ into Heaven, and that it will be fully
   consummated after the resurrection of the body, and when all the
   members of the Church universal are introduced into Heaven.

   I know certain passages of Scripture which are produced, as proofs that
   the souls of the Old Testament Saints have been in Heaven. (1.) "The
   spirit shall return unto God who gave it." (Eccl. xii. 7.) But this
   expression must either be understood in reference to all the spirits of
   men of every description, and thus will afford no assistance to this
   argument; or, if it be understood as relating to the souls of good men
   alone, it does not even then follow, that, because "the spirit returns
   unto God," it ascends into Heaven property so called. I prefer,
   however, the former mode of interpretation, a return to God the Creator
   and the Preserver of spirits, and the Judge of the deeds done in the
   body. (2.) Enoch is said to have been taken to God, (Gen. v. 24) and
   Elijah to have ascended by a whirlwind into Heaven. (2 Kings ii. 11.)
   But, beside the fact of these examples being out of the common order,
   it does not follow of course that because Enoch was taken to God, he
   was translated into the highest heaven. For the word "Heaven" is very
   wide in its signification. The same observation applies to Elijah. See
   Peter Martyr and Vatablus on 2 Kings ii. 13. (3.) "Christ is now become
   the first fruits of them that slept." (1 Cor. xv. 20.) This would not
   appear to be correct, if Enoch and Elijah ascended into the highest
   Heaven, clothed in bodies endued with immortality. (4.) "Lazarus was
   carried by the angels into Abraham's bosom," where he enjoyed
   consolation. (Luke xvi. 22.) But it is not proved, that Heaven itself
   is described by the term, "Abraham's bosom." It is intimated, that
   Lazarus was gathered into the bosom of his father Abraham, in which he
   might rest in hope of a full beatification in Heaven itself, which was
   to be procured by Christ. For this reason the Apostle, after the
   ascension of Christ into Heaven, "had a desire to be with Christ."
   (Phil. i. 23.) (5.) "Many shall come from the East and the West, and
   shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of
   Heaven." (Matt. viii. 11.) But it does not thence follow, that the
   Fathers have been in Heaven, properly so called, before they, who are
   to be called from among the Gentiles, sit down with them. (6.) It
   appears from Matthew 25, that there are only two places, one destined
   for the pious, the other for the wicked. But it does not hence
   necessarily follow, that the place destined for the pious has always
   been Heaven supreme. There have never been more places, because there
   have never been more states. But it is not necessary, that they should
   always be the same places without any change. The authority of this
   declaration is preserved inviolate, provided a third place be never
   added to the former two. (7.) "The reward" which awaits the pious "in
   heaven," is said to be "great." (Matt. v. 12.) Let this be granted.
   Therefore, [will some reasoner say,] they must instantly after death be
   translated into the supreme heaven." This does not necessarily follow.
   For it is well known, that the Scriptures have in these promises a
   reference to the period which immediately succeeds the last judgment,
   according to the following expression: "Behold I come quickly, and my
   reward is with me." The spouse replies, "Even so come, Lord Jesus!"
   (Rev. xxii. 12, 20) In the same manner must be understood that passage
   in Luke, "They may receive you into everlasting habitations;" (Luke
   xvi. 9;) that is, after the last judgment, at least after [the
   ascension of] Christ, whose office it was to prepare those mansions for
   his people. (John xiv. 2.) (8.) "The Fathers are said to have been
   justified by the same faith as we are." (Acts xiii. 33.) I acknowledge
   this. "Therefore they have always been in Heaven even before [the
   ascension of] Christ, and we shall be after Him." This is not a
   necessary consequence. For there are degrees in glorification. Nor is
   it at all wonderful, if they be said to be rendered more blessed and
   glorious after the ascension of Christ into Heaven. (9.) "But Jesus
   said to the malefactor, to-day shalt thou be with me in Paradise."
   (.Luke xxiii. 43.) I reply, FIRST, It is not necessary that by
   "Paradise" should here be understood the third heaven, or the eternal
   abode of the blessed. For it denotes in general a place of felicity.
   SECONDLY, St. Chrysostom says, the crucified thief was the first person
   whose spirit entered into heaven. Yet he did not ascend there before
   Christ, nor before the vail of the temple had been rent in twain."

   But to these passages is opposed that admirable dispensation or economy
   of God, which is distinguished according to the times preceding Christ,
   and those which followed. Of this dispensation the temple at Jerusalem
   was an illustrious [exemplar] pattern. For its external part, by means
   of an interposing vail, was separated and divided from that in which
   the priests daily appeared, and which was called "The Holy of Holies,"
   in contradistinction to that which is called "The Sanctuary," (Heb. ix.
   2, 3.) Heaven itself is designated by "The Holy of Holies" in Heb. ix.
   24. It was shut as long as the former tabernacle stood, and until
   Christ entered into it by his own blood. (Heb. ix. 8-12.) It was his
   province as "our Forerunner" to precede us, that we also might be able
   to enter into those things which are within the vail. (Heb. vi. 19.)
   For this purpose it was necessary that liberty should be granted to us
   of "entering into the Holiest by the blood of Jesus, by that new and
   living way which he hath consecrated for us through the vail, that is
   to say, his flesh." (Heb. x. 19, 20.) On this account the ancient
   worthies, who, "through faith have" most evidently "gained this
   testimony that they pleased God," are said, "not to have received or
   obtained the promise; God having provided some better thing for us,"
   who follow Christ, "that they without us should not be made perfect."
   (Heb. xi. 40.) These passages of scripture, and a view of the
   dispensation which they describe, are among the principal reasons why I
   cannot give my assent to the opinion which affirms, that the Fathers
   have been in Heaven properly so called.

   But, that our brethren may not so highly blame me, I will oppose to
   them one or two of the approved divines of our church. CALVIN, in his
   INSTITUTES," (lib. iv, c. 1, s. 12,) says: "For what churches would
   dissent from each other on this account alone--that one of them,
   without any of the licentiousness of contention or the obstinacy of
   assertion, holds the opinion that souls, when they leave their bodies,
   soar up to Heaven; while another church does not venture to define
   anything about the place, but only maintains with certainty that they
   still live in the Lord." Peruse also the following passage in his
   "Institutes," (lib. iii, c. 25, s. 6.) "Many persons torment themselves
   by disputing about the place which departed souls occupy, and whether
   they be now in the enjoyment of heavenly glory or not. But it is
   foolish and rash to inquire about things unknown, more deeply than God
   permits us to know them." Behold, Calvin here says, that it is
   frivolous to contend whether the souls of the dead already enjoy
   celestial glory or not; and, in his judgment, it ought not to be made a
   subject of contention. Yet I am condemned, or at least am accused,
   because I dare not positively affirm "that the souls of the Fathers
   before Christ, were in Heaven, properly so called." PETER MARTYR
   proceeds still further, and is bold enough to assert, in his
   observations on 2 Kings ii. 13, "that the souls of the Fathers before
   Christ, were not in Heaven properly so called." He says, "Now if I be
   asked, to what place were Enoch and Elijah translated? I will say
   simply that I do not know, because that circumstance is not delivered
   in the divine volume. Yet if we might follow a very probable analogy, I
   would say, they were conducted to the place of the Fathers, or into
   Abraham's bosom, that they might there pass their time with the blessed
   Patriarchs in expectation of the resurrection of Christ, and that they
   might afterwards be elevated above the Heavens with Him when he was
   raised up again." Where it is to be noted, that Martyr entertains
   doubts concerning Enoch and Elijah, but speaks decisively about those
   who are in Abraham's bosom, that is, about the Fathers, "that they were
   raised up above the heavens with Christ at his resurrection." This
   likewise appears from what he mentions a little afterwards. With regard
   to that sublime ascension, we grant that no one enjoyed it before
   Christ. Enoch, therefore, and Elijah went to the Fathers, and there
   with them waited for Christ, upon whom, in company with the rest, they
   were attendants when he entered into heaven." See also BULLINGER on
   Luke xvi. 23;

   Heb. ix. 8; 1 Pet. iii. 19.

   From the preceding explanation and extracts, I have, I think, rendered
   it evident, that not only had I just causes for being doubtful
   concerning this matter, but that I likewise ought not therefore to be
   blamed, even though I had uttered what they here charge upon me as an
   error; nay, what is still more, that I ought to be tolerated had I
   simply asserted, "that the souls of the Fathers were not in Heaven
   prior to the ascension of Christ to that blissful abode."
     __________________________________________________________________

ARTICLE XI

   It is a matter of doubt, whether believers under the Old Testament
   understood that the legal ceremonies were types of Christ and of his
   benefits.

  ANSWER

   I do not remember to have said this at any time: nay, I am conscious
   that I have never said it, because I never yet durst utter any such
   expression. But I have said, that an inquiry not altogether
   unprofitable might be instituted, "how far the ancient Jews understood
   the legal ceremonies to be types of Christ?" At least I feel myself
   well assured, that they did not understand those ceremonies, as we do
   to whom the mystery of the Gospel is revealed. Nor do I suppose that
   any one will venture to deny this. But I wish our brethren would take
   upon themselves the task of proving, that believers under the Old
   Testament understood the legal ceremonies to be types of Christ and his
   benefits. For they not only know that this opinion of theirs is called
   in question by some persons, but that it is likewise confidently
   denied. Let them make the experiment, and they will perceive how
   difficult an enterprise they have undertaken. For the passages which
   seem to prove their proposition, are taken away from them in such a
   specious manner by their adversaries, that a man who is accustomed to
   yield assent to those things alone which are well supported by proofs,
   may be easily induced to doubt whether the believers under the Old
   Testament had any knowledge of this matter; especially if he consider,
   that, according to Gal. iv. 3, the whole of the ancient [Jewish] Church
   was in a state of infancy or childhood, and therefore possessed only
   the understanding of a child. Whether an infant be competent to
   perceive in these corporal things the spiritual things which are
   signified by them, let those decide who are acquainted with that
   passage, "When I was a child, I understood as a child." (1 Cor. xiii.
   11.) Let those passages also be inspected which, we will venture to
   say, have a typical signification, because we have been taught so to
   view them by Christ and his Apostles; and it will be seen whether they
   be made so plain and obvious, as, without the previous interpretation
   of the Messiah, to have enabled us to understand them according to
   their spiritual meaning. It is said, (John viii. 56,) "Abraham saw the
   day of Christ, and was glad." Those who are of a contrary sentiment,
   interpret this passage as if it was to be understood by a metonymy,
   because, Abraham saw the day of Isaac, who was a type of Christ, and
   therefore his day was "the day of Christ." It is an undoubted fact,
   that no mention is made in the scriptures of any other rejoicing than
   of this. The faith of Abraham and its object occupy nearly the whole of
   the fourth chapter of the Epistle to the Romans. Let what is there said
   be compared together; and let it be demonstrated from this comparison,
   that Abraham saw Christ in those promises which he apprehended by
   faith. Who would understand "the sign of Jonah," to have been
   instituted to typify the three days in which Christ remained in the
   bowels of the earth, unless Christ had himself given that explanation?
   What injury does this opinion produce, since those who hold it do not
   deny, that the Fathers were saved by the infantile faith which they
   possessed? For an infant is as much the heir of his father's property,
   as an adult son.

   Should any one say, it follows as a necessary consequence, that "the
   Fathers were saved without faith in Christ." I reply, the faith which
   has respect to the salvation of God that has been promised by him, and
   "waits for the redemption of Israel," understood under a general
   notion, is "faith in Christ," according to the dispensation of that
   age. This is easily perceived from the following passages: "I have
   waited for thy salvation, or thy saving mercy, O Lord! (Gen. xlix, 18.)
   "And the same man, (Simeon,) was just and devout, waiting for the
   consolation of Israel." (Luke ii. 25.) In the same chapter it is said,
   "Anna, a prophetess, spake of him to all them that looked for
   redemption in Jerusalem."

   But if we consider the "faith in Christ," which is that of the New
   Testament, and which has regard to Him as a Spiritual and Heavenly
   King, who bestows upon his followers those celestial benefits which he
   has procured for them by his passion and death; then a greater
   difficulty will hence arise. What man ever received more promises
   concerning the Messiah than David, or who has prophesied more largely
   about Him? Yet any one may with some show of reason, entertain doubts,
   whether David really understood that the Messiah would be a Spiritual
   and Heavenly Monarch; for when he seemed to be pouring out his whole
   soul before the Lord, (2 Sam. 7,) he did not suffer a single word to
   escape that might indicate the bent of his understanding to this point,
   which, nevertheless, would have been of great potency in magnifying
   Jehovah and in confirming his own confidence.

   The knowledge which all Israel had of the Messiah and of his kingdom,
   in the days when Christ was himself on earth, appears not only from the
   Pharisees and the whole of the populace, but also from his own
   disciples after they had for three years and more enjoyed constant
   opportunities of communication with him, and had heard from his own
   lips frequent and open mention of the kingdom of Heaven. Nay, what is
   still more wonderful, immediately after the resurrection of Christ from
   the dead, they did not even then comprehend his meaning. (Luke xxiv.
   21-25.) From this, it seems, we must say, either "that the knowledge
   which they formerly possessed had gradually died away," or "that the
   Pharisees, through their hatred against Jesus, had corrupted that
   knowledge." But neither of these assertions appears to be at all
   probable. (1.) The former is not; because the nearer those times were
   to the Messiah, the clearer were the prophecies concerning him, and the
   more manifest the apprehension of them. And this for a good reason,
   because it then began to be still more necessary for men to believe
   that person to be the Messiah, or at least the time was fast
   approaching in which such a faith would become necessary. (2.) The
   latter is not probable; because the Pharisees conceived that hatred
   against him on account of his preaching and miracles. But it was at the
   very commencement of his office that he called into his service those
   twelve disciples. There are persons, I am aware, who produce many
   things from the Rabbinical writers of that age, concerning the
   spiritual kingdom of Christ; but I leave those passages to the authors
   of them, because it is out of my power to pronounce a decision on the
   subject.

   While I have been engaged in the contemplation of this topic, and
   desirous to prove from the preceding prophecies, that the kingdom of
   Christ the Messiah, was to be spiritual, no small difficulty has
   arisen, especially after consulting most of those who have written upon
   it. Let those who on this point do not allow any one to indulge in a
   single doubt, try an experiment. Let them exhibit a specimen of the
   arguments by which they suppose their doctrine can be proved, even in
   this age, which is illuminated with the light of the New Testament. I
   will engage, that, after this experiment, they will not pass such a
   sinister judgment on those who confess to feel some hesitation about
   this point.

   These observations have been adduced by me, not with the design of
   denying that the opinion of the brethren on this matter is true, much
   less for the purpose of confuting it. But I adduce them, to teach
   others to bear with the weakness of that man who dares not act the part
   of a dogmatist on this subject.
     __________________________________________________________________

ARTICLE XII

   Christ has died for all men and for every individual.

  ANSWER

   This assertion was never made by me, either in public or private,
   except when it was accompanied by such an explanation as the
   controversies which are excited on this subject have rendered
   necessary. For the phrase here used possesses much ambiguity. Thus it
   may mean either that "the price of the death of Christ was given for
   all and for every one," or that "the redemption, which was obtained by
   means of that price, is applied and communicated to all men and to
   every one." (1.) Of this latter sentiment I entirely disapprove,
   because God has by a peremptory decree resolved, that believers alone
   should be made partakers of this redemption. (2.) Let those who reject
   the former of these opinions consider how they can answer the following
   scriptures, which declare, that Christ died for all men; that He is the
   propitiation for the sins of the whole world; (1 John ii. 2;) that He
   took away the sin of the world; (John i. 29;) that He gave his flesh
   for the life of the world; (John vi. 51;) that Christ died even for
   that man who might be destroyed with the meat of another person; (Rom.
   xiv. 15;) and that false teachers make merchandise even of those who
   deny the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift
   destruction; (2 Pet. ii. 1, 3.) He therefore who speaks thus, speaks
   with the Scriptures; while he who rejects such phraseology, is a daring
   man, one who sits in judgment on the Scriptures and is not an
   interpreter of them. But he who explains those passages agreeably to
   the analogy of faith, performs the duty of a good interpreter and
   prophesier [or preacher] in the Church of God.

   All the controversy, therefore, lies in the interpretation. The words
   themselves ought to be simply approved, because they are the words of
   Scripture. I will now produce a passage or two from Prosper of
   Aquitain, to prove that this distinction was even in his time employed:
   "He who says that the saviour was not crucified for the redemption of
   the whole world, has regard, not to the virtue of the sacrament, but to
   the case of unbelievers, since the blood of Jesus Christ is the price
   paid for the whole world. To that precious ransom they are strangers,
   who, either being delighted with their captivity, have no wish to be
   redeemed, or, after they have been redeemed, return to the same
   servitude." (Sent. 4, super cap. Gallorum.) In another passage he says,
   "With respect both to the magnitude and potency of the price, and with
   respect to the one general cause of mankind, the blood of Christ is the
   redemption of the whole world. But those who pass through this life
   without the faith of Christ, and without the sacrament of regeneration,
   are utter strangers to redemption." Such is likewise the concurrent
   opinion of all antiquity. This is a consideration to which I wish to
   obtain a little more careful attention from many persons, that they may
   not so easily fasten the crime of novelty on him who says anything
   which they had never before heard, or which was previously unknown to
   them.
     __________________________________________________________________

ARTICLES XIII AND XIV

   Original Sin will condemn no man.

   In every nation, all infants who die without [having committed] actual
   sins, are saved.

  ANSWER

   These articles are ascribed to Borrius. To augment their number, they
   have made them two, when one would have been sufficient, from which the
   other necessarily follows, even according to their own opinion. For if
   "original sin condemns no one," it is a necessary consequence that "all
   those will be saved who have not themselves committed actual
   transgressions." Of this class are all infants without distinction;
   unless some one will invent a state between salvation and damnation, by
   a folly similar to that by which, according to St. Augustine, Pelagius
   made a distinction between salvation and the kingdom of heaven.

   But Borrius denies having ever publicly taught either the one or the
   other. He conferred indeed in private on this subject, with some
   candidates for Holy Orders: and he considers that it was not unlawful
   for him so to do, or to hold such an opinion, under the influence of
   reasons which he willingly submits to the examination of his brethren;
   who, when they have confuted them, may teach him more correct doctrine,
   and induce him to change his opinion. His reasons are the following:

   1. Because God has taken the whole human race into the grace of
   reconciliation, and has entered into a covenant of grace with Adam, and
   with the whole of his posterity in him. In which he promises the
   remission of all sins to as many as stand steadfastly, and deal not
   treacherously, in that covenant. But God not only entered into it with
   Adam, but also afterwards renewed it with Noah, and at length confirmed
   and perfected it through Christ Jesus. And since infants have not
   transgressed this covenant, they do not seem to be obnoxious to
   condemnation; unless we maintain, that God is unwilling to treat with
   infants, who depart out of this life before they arrive at adult age,
   on that gracious condition under which, notwithstanding, they are also
   comprehended as parties to the covenant; and therefore that their
   condition is much worse than that of adults, to whom is tendered the
   remission of all sins, not only of that which they perpetrated in Adam,
   but likewise, of those which they have themselves personally committed.
   The condition of infants, however is, in this case, much worse, by no
   fault or demerit of their own, but because it was God's pleasure thus
   to act towards them. From these premises it would follow, that it was
   the will of God to condemn them for the commission of sin, before He
   either promised or entered into a covenant of grace; as though they had
   been excluded and rejected from that covenant by a previous decree of
   God, and as though the promise concerning the saviour did not at all
   belong to them.

   2. When Adam sinned in his own person and with his free will, God
   pardoned that transgression. There is no reason then why it was the
   will of God to impute this sin to infants, who are said to have sinned
   in Adam, before they had any personal existence, and therefore, before
   they could possibly sin at their own will and pleasure.

   3. Because, in this instance, God would appear to act towards infants
   with far more severity than towards the very devils. For the rigor of
   God against the apostate angels was extreme, because he would not
   pardon the crime which they had perpetrated. There is the same extreme
   rigor displayed against infants, who are condemned for the sin of Adam.
   But it is much greater; for all the [evil] angels sinned in their own
   persons, while infants sinned in the person of their first father Adam.
   On this account, the angels themselves were in fault, because they
   committed an offense which it was possible for them to avoid; while
   infants were not in fault, only so far as they existed in Adam, and
   were by his will involved in sin and guilt.

   These reasons are undoubtedly of such great importance, that I am of
   opinion those who maintain the contrary are bound to confute them,
   before they can affix to any other person a mark of heresy. I am aware,
   that they place antiquity in opposition, because [they say] its
   judgment was in their favour. Antiquity, however, cannot be set up in
   opposition by those who, on this subject, when the salvation of infants
   is discussed, are themselves unwilling to abide by the judgment of the
   ancients. But our brethren depart from antiquity, on this very topic,
   in two ways:

   (1.) Antiquity maintains, that all infants who depart out of this life
   without having been baptized, would be damned; but that such as were
   baptized and died before they attained to adult age, would be saved.
   St. Augustine asserts this to be the Catholic doctrine in these words:
   "If you wish to be a Catholic, be unwilling to believe, declare, or
   teach, that infants who are prevented by death from being baptized, can
   attain to the remission of original sins." (De anima et ejus Orig.,
   lib. 3, cap. 9.) To this doctrine our brethren will by no means accede;
   but they contradict both parts of it.

   (2.) Antiquity maintains that the grace of baptism takes away original
   sin, even from those who have not been predestinated; according to this
   passage from Prosper of Aquitain: "That man is not a Catholic who says,
   that the grace of baptism, when received, does not take away original
   sin from those who have not been predestinated to life." (Ad Cap.
   Gallorum, Sent. 2.) To this opinion also our brethren strongly object.
   But it does not appear equitable, that, whenever it is agreeable to
   themselves, they should be displeased with those who dissent from them,
   because they dissent from the Fathers; and again, that, whenever it is
   their good pleasure, the same parties do themselves dissent from the
   Fathers on this very subject.

   But with respect to the sentiments of the ancient Christian Fathers,
   about the damnation of the unbaptized solely on account of original
   sin, they and their successors seem to have mitigated, or at least, to
   have attempted to soften down such a harsh opinion. For some of them
   have declared, "that the unbaptized would be in the mildest damnation
   of all;" and others, "that they would be afflicted, not with the
   punishment of feeling, but only with that of loss." To this last
   opinion some of them have added, "that this punishment would be
   inflicted on them without any stings from their own consciences."
   Though it is a consequence of not being baptized, that the parties are
   said to endure only the punishment of loss, and not that of feeling;
   yet this feeling exists wherever the stings or gnawings of conscience
   exists, that is, where the gnawing worm never dies. But let our
   brethren consider what species of damnation that is which is inflicted
   on account of sin, and from which no gnawing remorse proceeds.

   From these observations, thus produced, it is apparent what opinion
   ought to be formed of the Fourteenth Article. It is at least so
   dependent on the Thirteenth, that it ought not to have been composed as
   a separate article, by those who maintain that there is no cause why
   infants should perish, except original sin which they committed in
   Adam, or which they received by propagation from Adam. But it is worth
   the trouble to see, on this subject, what were the sentiments of Dr.
   Francis Junius, who a few years ago was Professor of Divinity in this
   our University. He affirms, that "all infants who are of the covenant
   and of election, are saved;" but he presumes, in charity, that "those
   infants whom God calls to himself, and timely removes out of this
   miserable vale of sins, are rather saved." (De Natura et Gratia, R.
   28.) Now, that which this divine either "affirms according to the
   doctrine of faith," or "presumes through charity," may not another man
   be allowed, without the charge of heresy, to hold within his own breast
   as a matter of opinion, which he is not in the least solicitous to
   obtrude on others or persuade them to believe? Indeed, "this accepting
   of men's persons" is far too prevalent, and is utterly unworthy of wise
   men. And what inconvenience, I pray, results from this doctrine? Is it
   supposed to follow as a necessary consequence from it, that, if the
   infants of unbelievers are saved, they are saved without Christ and his
   intervention?. Borrius, however, denies any such consequence, and has
   Junius assenting with him on this subject. If the brethren dissent from
   this opinion, and think that the consequences which they themselves
   deduce are agreeable to the premises, then all the children of
   unbelievers must be subject to condemnation, the children of
   unbelievers, I repeat, who are "strangers from the covenant." For this
   conclusion no other reason can be rendered, than their being the
   children of those who are "strangers from the covenant." From which it
   seems, on the contrary, to be inferred, that all the children of those
   who are in the covenant are saved, provided they die in the age of
   infancy. But since our brethren deny this inference, behold the kind of
   dogma which is believed by them. "All the infants of those who are
   strangers from the covenant are damned; and of the offspring of those
   parents who are in the covenant, some infants that die are damned,
   while others are saved." I leave it to those who are deeply versed in
   these matters, to decide, whether such a dogma as this ever obtained in
   any church of Christ.
     __________________________________________________________________

ARTICLE XV

   If the Heathen, and those who are strangers to the true knowledge of
   God, do those things which by the powers of nature they are enabled to
   do, God will not condemn them, but will reward these their works by a
   more enlarged knowledge, by which they may be bought to salvation.

  ANSWER

   This was never uttered by me, nor indeed by Borrius, under such a form,
   and in these expressions. Nay, it is not very probable, that any man,
   how small soever his skill might be in sacred things, would deliver the
   apprehensions of his mind in a manner so utterly confused and
   indigested, as to beget the suspicion of a falsehood in the very words
   in which he enunciates his opinion. For what man is there, who, as a
   stranger to the true knowledge of God, will do a thing that can in any
   way be acceptable to God? It is necessary that the thing which will
   please God, be itself good, at least, in a certain respect. It is
   further necessary, that he who performs it knows it to be good and
   agreeable to God. "For whatsoever is not of faith, is sin," that is,
   whatsoever is done without an assured knowledge that it is good and
   agreeable to God. Thus far, therefore, it is needful for him to have a
   true knowledge of God, which the Apostle attributes even to the
   Gentiles. (Rom. i, 18-21, 25, 28; ii, 14, 15.) Without this explanation
   there will be a contradiction in this enunciation. "He who is entirely
   destitute of the true knowledge of God, can perform something which God
   considers to be so grateful to Himself as to remunerate it with some
   reward." These, our good brethren, either do not perceive this
   contradiction; or they suppose, that the persons to whom they ascribe
   this opinion are such egregious simpletons as they would thus make them
   appear.

   Then, what is the nature of this expression, "if they do those things
   which the powers of nature enable them to perform?" Is "nature," when
   entirely destitute of grace and of the Spirit of God, furnished with
   the knowledge of that truth which is said to be "held in
   unrighteousness," by the knowledge of "that which may be known of God,
   even his eternal power and Godhead," which may instigate man to glorify
   God, and which deprives him of all excuse, if he does not glorify God
   as he knows Him? I do not think, that such properties as these can,
   without falsehood and injury to Divine Grace, be ascribed to "nature,"
   which, when destitute of grace and of the Spirit of God, tends directly
   downward to those things which are earthly.

   If our brethren suppose, that these matters exhibit themselves in this
   foolish manner, what reason have they for so readily ascribing such an
   undigested paragraph to men, who, they ought to have known, are not
   entirely destitute of the knowledge of sacred subjects? But if our
   brethren really think that man can do some portion of good by the
   powers of nature, they are themselves not far from Pelagianism, which
   yet they are solicitous to fasten on others. This Article, enunciated
   thus in their own style, seems to indicate that they think man capable
   of doing something good "by the powers of nature;" but that, by such
   good performance, he will "neither escape condemnation nor obtain a
   reward." For these attributes are ascribed to the subject in this
   enunciation; and because these attributes do not in their opinion,
   agree with this subject, they accuse of heresy the thing thus
   enunciated. If they believe that "a man, who is a stranger to the true
   knowledge of God," is capable of doing nothing good, this ought in the
   first place, to have been charged with heresy. If they think that no
   one "by the powers of nature," can perform any thing that is pleasing
   to God, then this ought to be reckoned as an error, if any man durst
   affirm it. From these remarks, it obviously follows, either that they
   are themselves very near the Pelagian heresy, or that they are ignorant
   of what is worthy, in the first instance or in the second, of
   reprehension, and what ought to be condemned as heretical.

   It is apparent, therefore, that it has been their wish to aggravate the
   error by this addition. But their labour has been in vain; because, by
   this addition, they have enabled us to deny that we ever employed any
   such expression or conceived such a thought; they have, at the same
   time, afforded just grounds for charging them with the heresy of
   Pelagius. Thus the incautious hunter is caught in the very snare which
   he had made for another. They would, therefore, have acted with far
   more caution and with greater safety, if they had omitted their
   exaggeration, and had charged us with this opinion, which they know to
   have been employed by the scholastic divines, and which they afterwards
   inserted in the succeeding Seventeenth Article, but enunciated in a
   manner somewhat different, "God will do that which is in Him, for the
   man who does what is in himself." But, even then, the explanation of
   the schoolmen ought to have been added, "that God will do this, not
   from (the merit of) condignity, but from (that of) congruity; and not
   because the act of man merits any such thing, but because it is
   befitting the great mercy and beneficence of God." Yet this saying of
   the schoolmen I should myself refuse to employ, except with the
   addition of these words: "God will bestow more grace upon that man who
   does what is in him by the power of divine grace which is already
   granted to him, according to the declaration of Christ, To him that
   hath shall be given," in which he comprises the cause why it was "given
   to the apostles to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven," and
   why "to others it was not given." (Matt. xiii. 11, 12.) In addition to
   this passage, and the first and second chapters of the Epistle to the
   Romans, which have already been quoted, peruse what is related in the
   Acts of the Apostles, (10, 16, 17,) about Cornelius the Centurion,
   Lydia, the seller of purple, and the Bereans.
     __________________________________________________________________

ARTICLE XVI

   The works of the unregenerate can be pleasing to God, and are
   (according to Borrius) the occasion, and (according to Arminius) the
   impulsive cause, by which God will be moved to communicate to them his
   saving grace.

  ANSWER

   About two years ago, were circulated Seventeen Articles, which were
   attributed to me, and of which the fifteenth is thus expressed: "Though
   the works of the unregenerate cannot possibly be pleasing to God, yet
   they are the occasion by which God is moved to communicate to them his
   saving grace." This difference induces me to suspect that the negative,
   cannot, has been omitted in this sixteenth article, unless, perhaps,
   since that time, having proceeded from bad to worse, I now positively
   affirm this, which, as I was a less audacious and more modest heretic,
   I then denied. However this may be, I assert that these good men
   neither comprehend our sentiments, know the phrases which we employ,
   nor, in order to know them, do they understand the meaning of those
   phrases. In consequence of this, it is no matter of surprise that they
   err greatly from the truth when they enunciate our sentiments in their
   words, or when they affix other (that is, their own) significations to
   our words. Of this transformation, they afford a manifest specimen in
   this article.

   1. For the word "the unregenerate," may be understood in two senses,
   (i.) Either as it denotes those who have felt no motion of the
   regenerating Spirit, or of its tendency or preparation for
   regeneration, and who are therefore, destitute of the first principle
   of regeneration. (ii.) Or it may signify those who are in the process
   of the new birth, and who feel those motions of the Holy Spirit which
   belong either to preparation or to the very essence of regeneration,
   but who are not yet regenerate; that is, they are brought by it to
   confess their sins, to mourn on account of them, to desire deliverance,
   and to seek out the Deliverer, who has been pointed out to them; but
   they are not yet furnished with that power of the Spirit by which the
   flesh, or the old man, is mortified, and by which a man, being
   transformed to newness of life, is rendered capable of performing works
   of righteousness.

   2. A thing is pleasing to God, either as an initial act, belonging to
   the commencement of conversion, or as a work perfect in its own
   essence, and as performed by a man who is converted and born again.
   Thus the confession, by which any one acknowledges himself to be "a
   cold, blind and poor creature," is pleasing to God; and the man,
   therefore, flies to Christ to "buy of him eye-salve, white raiment, and
   gold." (Rev. iii. 15-18.) Works which proceed from fervent love are
   also pleasing to God. See the distinction which Calvin draws between
   "initial and filial fear;" and that of Beza, who is of opinion that
   "sorrow and contrition for sin do not belong to the essential parts of
   regeneration, but only to those which are preparatory;" but he places
   "the very essence of regeneration in mortification, and in vivification
   or quickening."

   3. "The occasion," and the impulsive cause, by which God is moved," are
   understood not always in the same sense, but variously. It will answer
   our purpose if I produce two passages, from a comparison of which a
   distinction may be collected, at once convenient and sufficient for our
   design. The king says, (Matt. xviii. 32) "I forgave thee all that debt
   because thou desiredest me." And God says to Abraham, (Gen. xxii. 16,
   17,) "Because thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld thy son,
   thine only son, in blessing, I will bless thee." He who does not
   perceive, in these passages, a difference in the impelling motives, as
   well as in the pleasure derived, must be very blind with respect to the
   Scriptures.

   4. "The saving grace of God" may be understood either as primary or
   secondary, as preceding or subsequent, as operating or cooperating, and
   as that which knocks or opens or enters in. Unless a man properly
   distinguishes each of these, and uses such words as correspond with
   these distinctions, he must of necessity stumble, and make others
   appear to stumble, whose opinions he does not accurately understand.
   But if a man will diligently consider these remarks, he will perceive
   that this article is agreeable to the Scriptures, according to one
   sense in which it may be taken, but that, according to another, it is
   very different.

   Let the word "unregenerate" be taken for a man who is now in the act of
   the new birth, though he be not yet actually born again; let "the
   pleasure" which God feels be taken for an initial act; let the
   impulsive cause be understood to refer to the final reception of the
   sinner into favour; and let secondary, subsequent, cooperating and
   entering grace be substituted for "saving grace;" and it will instantly
   be manifest, that we speak what is right when we say: "Serious sorrow
   on account of sin is so far pleasing to God, that by it, according to
   the multitude of his mercies, he is moved to bestow grace on a man who
   is a sinner."

   From these observations, I think, it is evident with what caution
   persons ought to speak on subjects on which the descent into heresy, or
   into the suspicion of heresy, is so smooth and easy. And our brethren
   ought in their prudence to have reflected that we are not altogether
   negligent of this cautiousness, since they cannot be ignorant that we
   are filly aware how much our words are exposed and obnoxious to
   injurious interpretations, and even to calumny. But unless they had
   earnestly searched for a multitude of Articles, they might have
   embraced this and the preceding, as well as that which succeeds, in the
   same chapter.
     __________________________________________________________________

ARTICLE XVII

   God will not deny his grace to any one who does what is in him.

  ANSWER

   This Article is so naturally connected with those which precede it,
   that he who grants one of the three, may, by the same effort, affirm
   the remainder; and he who denies one may reject all the others. They
   might, therefore, have spared some portion of this needless labour, and
   might, with much greater convenience, have proposed one article of the
   following description, instead of three: "It is possible for a man to
   do some good thing without the aid of grace; and if he does it, God
   will recompense or remunerate that act by more abundant grace." But we
   could always have fastened the charge of falsehood upon an article of
   this kind. It was, therefore, a much safer course for them to play with
   equivocations, that the fraud contained in the calumny might not with
   equal facility he made known to all persons.

   But with respect to this article, I declare that it never came into our
   minds to employ such confused expressions as these, which, at the very
   first sight of them, exclude grace from the commencement of conversion;
   though we always, and on all occasions, make this grace to precede, to
   accompany, and to follow; and without which, we constantly assert, no
   good action whatever, can be produced by man. Nay, we carry this
   principal so far as not to dare to attribute the power here described,
   even to the nature of Adam himself, without the help of Divine grace,
   both infused and assisting. It thus becomes evident, that the
   fabricated opinion is imposed on us through calumny. If our brethren
   entertain the same sentiments, we are perfectly at agreement. But if
   they are of opinion that Adam was able by nature, without supernatural
   aid, to fulfill the law imposed on him, they seem not to recede far
   from Pelagians, since this saying of Augustine is received by these our
   brethren: "Supernatural things were lost, natural things were
   corrupted." Whence it follows, what remnant soever there was of natural
   things, just so much power remained to fulfill the law--what is
   premised being granted, that Adam was capable by his own nature to obey
   God without grace, as the latter is usually distinguished in opposition
   to nature. When they charge us with this doctrine, they undoubtedly
   declare, that in their judgment, it is such as may fall in with our
   meaning; and, therefore, that they do not perceive so much absurdity in
   this article as there is in reality; unless they think that nothing can
   be devised so absurd that we are not inclined and prepared to believe
   and publish.

   We esteem this article as one of such great absurdity that we would not
   be soon induced to attribute it to any person of the least skill in
   sacred matters. For how can a man, without the assistance of Divine
   Grace, perform any thing which is acceptable to God, and which he will
   remunerate with the saving reward either of further grace or of life
   eternal? But this article excludes primary grace with sufficient
   explicitness when it says, "To him who does what is in himself." For if
   this expression be understood in the following sense: "To him who does
   what he can by the primary grace already conferred upon him," then
   there is no absurdity in this sentence: "God will bestow further grace
   upon him who profitably uses that which is primary;" and, by the
   malevolent suppression of what ought to have been added, the brethren
   openly declare that it was their wish for this calumny to gain
   credence.
     __________________________________________________________________

ARTICLE XVIII

   God undoubtedly converts, without the external preaching of the Gospel,
   great numbers of persons to the saving knowledge of Christ, among those
   who have no outward preaching; and he effects such conversions either
   by the inward revelation of the Holy Spirit, or by the ministry of
   angels. (BORRIUS & ARMINIUS.)

  ANSWER

   I never uttered such a sentiment as this. Borrius has said something
   like it, though not exactly the same, in the following words: "It is
   possible that God, by the inward revelation of the Holy Spirit, or by
   the ministry of angels, instructed the wise men, who came from the
   east, concerning Jesus, whom they came to adore." But the words
   "undoubtedly," and "great numbers of persons," are the additions of
   calumny, and is of a most audacious character, charging us with that
   which, it is very probable, we never spoke, and of which we never
   thought; and we have learned that this audacity of boldly affirming any
   thing whatsoever, under which the junior pastors generally labour, and
   those who are ignorant of the small stock of knowledge that they
   possess, is an evil exceedingly dangerous in the church of Christ.

   1. Is it probable, that any prudent man will affirm that "something is
   undoubtedly done in great numbers of persons," of which he is not able,
   when required, to produce a single example? We confess, that we cannot
   bring an instance of what is here imputed to us. For, if it were
   produced by us, it would become a subject of controversy; as has been
   the fate of the sentiments of Zwinglius concerning the salvation of
   Socrates, Aristides, and of others in similar circumstances, who must
   have been instructed concerning their salvation by the Holy Ghost or by
   angels. For it is scarcely within the bounds of probability, that they
   had seen the Sacred Scriptures and had been instructed out of them.

   2. Besides, if this saying of Christ had occurred to the recollection
   of our brethren, "Speak, Paul! and hold not thy peace: For I have much
   people in this city," (Acts xix. 9, 10,) they would not so readily have
   burdened us with this article, who have learned from this saying of
   Christ, that God sends the external preaching of his word to nations,
   when it is his good pleasure for great numbers of them to be converted.

   3. The following is a saying in very common and frequent use.

   "The ordinary means and instrument of conversation is the preaching of
   the Divine word by mortal men, to which therefore all persons are
   bound; but the Holy Spirit has not so bound himself to this method, as
   to be unable to operate in an extraordinary way, without the
   intervention of human aid, when it seemeth good to Himself." Now if our
   brethren had reflected, that this very common sentence obtains our high
   approval, they would not have thought of charging this article upon us,
   at least they would not have accounted it erroneous. For, with regard
   to the FIRST, what is extraordinary does not obtain among "great
   numbers of persons;" for if it did, it would immediately begin to be
   ordinary. With regard to the SECOND, if "the preaching of the word by
   mortal men," be "the ordinary means," by which it is also intimated
   that some means are extraordinary, and since the whole of our church,
   nay, in my opinion, since the whole Christian world bears its testimony
   to this, then indeed it is neither a heresy nor an error to say, "Even
   without this means [without the preaching of the word] God can convert
   some persons." To this might likewise be added the word "undoubtedly."
   For if it be doubtful whether any one be saved by any other means,
   (that is, by "means extraordinary,") than by human preaching; then it
   becomes a matter of doubt, whether it be necessary for "the preaching
   of the Divine word by mortal men," to be called "the ordinary means."

   4. What peril or error can there be in any man saying, "God converts
   great numbers of persons, (that is, very many,) by the internal
   revelation of the Holy Spirit or by the ministry of angels; "provided
   it be at the same time stated, that no one is converted except by this
   very word, and by the meaning of this word, which God sends by men to
   those communities or nations whom He hath purposed to unite to himself.
   The objectors will perhaps reply, "It is to be feared, that, if a
   nation of those who have been outwardly called should believe this,
   rejecting external preaching, they would expect such an internal
   revelation or the address of an angel." Truly, this would be as
   unnatural a subject of fear, as that a man would be unwilling to taste
   of the bread which was laid before him, because he understands, "Man
   shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of
   the mouth of God." But I desist; lest, while instituting an examination
   into the causes of this fear, I should proceed much further, and arrive
   at a point to which our brethren might be unwilling for me on this
   occasion to advance. A word is sufficient for the wise.
     __________________________________________________________________

ARTICLE XIX

   Before his fall, Adam had not the power to believe, because there was
   no necessity for faith; God, therefore, could not require faith from
   him after the fall.

  ANSWER

   Unless I was well acquainted with the disposition of certain persons, I
   could have taken a solemn oath, that the ascription of this article to
   me, as the words now stand, is an act which is attributed to them
   through calumny. Can I be of opinion that "before his fall Adam had not
   the power to believe; "and, forsooth, on this account, "because there
   was no necessity for faith." Who is unacquainted with that expression
   of the apostle? "He who approaches to God must believe that He exists
   and that He is a rewarder of those who diligently seek him." I do not
   think, that there is a single Mahometan or Jew who dare make any such
   assertion as this article contains. The man who will affirm it, must be
   ignorant of the nature of faith in its universal acceptation. But who
   is able to love, fear, worship, honour and obey God, without faith,
   that is the principle and foundation of all those acts which can be
   performed to God according to his will?

   This calumny against me is audacious and foolish. But I think, it was
   the wish of its inventors to have added the words, "the power to
   believe in Christ;" and indeed they ought to have made this addition.
   Yet perhaps some one is insane enough to say, that "all faith in God is
   faith in Christ." being inclined to such persuasion by the argument
   "that there is now no true faith in God, which is not faith in Christ."
   I say therefore, I affirm and assert, I profess and teach, "that,
   before his fall, Adam had not the power to believe in Christ, because
   faith in Christ was not then necessary; and that God therefore could
   not require this faith from him after the fall:" That is to say, God
   could not require it on this account, "because Adam had lost that power
   of believing by his own fault," which is the opinion of those who
   charge me with the doctrine of this article. But God could have
   required it, because he was prepared, to bestow those gracious aids
   which were necessary and sufficient for believing in Christ, and
   therefore to bestow faith itself in Christ.

   But since I here confine myself to a simple denial, the proof of these
   three things is incumbent upon the brethren who affirm them. (1.) The
   Proposition, (2.) The Reason added, and (3.) The Conclusion deduced
   from it. The PROPOSITION is this:

   "Before his fall, Adam had the power to believe in Christ."

   The REASON is, "because this faith was necessary for him." The
   CONCLUSION is, "Therefore God could of right demand this faith from him
   after the fall."

   1. A certain learned man endeavours to prove the PROPOSITION, which he
   thus enunciates. "Before his fall, Adam had an implanted power to
   believe the Gospel," that is "on the hypothesis of the Gospel;" or, as
   I interpret it, "If the Gospel had been announced to him." The argument
   which this learned man employs in proof is, "Because Adam did not
   labour under blindness of mind, hardness of heart, or perturbation of
   the passions; (which are the internal causes of an incapacity to
   believe;) but he possessed a lucid mind, and an upright will and
   affections, and, if the Gospel of God had been announced to him, he was
   able clearly to perceive and approve its truth, and with his heart to
   embrace its benefits."

   2. I do not suppose any one will disapprove of the REASON which they
   assign, and therefore I do not require a proof of it from them; yet I
   wish the following suggestions to be well considered, if faith, in
   Christ was not necessary for Adam, to what purpose was the power of
   believing in Christ conferred upon him?

   3. But the necessity of proving the CONCLUSION is incumbent on our
   brethren, because they express it themselves in those terms, and indeed
   with a reason added to it, "Because Adam by his own fault through sin
   lost that power." Out of respect to the person, I will abstain from a
   confutation of this argument; not because I account it incapable of a
   satisfactory refutation, which, I hope, will in due time make its
   appearance.

   I will now produce a few arguments in proof of my opinion.

   FIRST. With regard to the Proposition, I prove, "that, before his fall,
   Adam did not possess the power to believe in Christ." (1.) Because such
   a belief would have been futile. For there was no necessity, no utility
   in believing in Christ. But nature makes nothing in vain; much less
   does God. (2.) Because, prior to his sin, God could not require of him
   faith in Christ. For Faith in Christ is faith in Him as a saviour from
   sins; he therefore, who will believe in Christ ought to believe that he
   is a sinner. But, before Adam had committed any offense, this would
   have been a false belief. Therefore, in commanding Adam to believe in
   Christ, God would have commanded him to believe a falsehood. That
   power, then, was not capable of being produced into an act, and is on
   the same account useless. (3.) Faith in Christ belongs to a new
   creation, which is effected by Christ, in his capacity of a Mediator
   between sinners and God. This is the reason why He is called "the
   Second Adam," and "the New Man." It is not, therefore, matter of
   wonder, that the capability of believing in Christ was not bestowed on
   man by virtue of the first creation. (4.) Faith in Christ is prescribed
   in the Gospel. But the Law and the Gospel are so far opposed to each
   other in the Scriptures, that a man cannot be saved by both of them at
   the same time; but if he be saved by the Law, he will not require to be
   saved by the Gospel; if he must be saved by the Gospel, then it would
   not be possible for him to be saved by the Law. God willed to treat
   with Adam, and actually did treat with him, in his primeval state,
   before he had sinned, according to the tenor of the legal covenant.
   What cause, therefore, can be devised, why God, in addition to the
   power of believing in Himself according to the Law, should likewise
   have bestowed on Adam the power of believing the Gospel and in Christ?
   If our brethren say, "that this power was one and the same," I will
   grant it, when the word "power" is taken in its most general notion,
   and according to its most remote application--that of the power of
   understanding and volition, and also the knowledge of common things and
   of all notions impressed on the mind. But I shall deny the correctness
   of their observation, if the word "power" is received as signifying any
   other thing than what is here specified. For that wisdom of God which
   is revealed in the Gospel excels, by many degrees, the wisdom which was
   manifested by the creation of the world and in the law.

   SECONDLY. With regard to the reason, "Because there was no necessity
   for Adam in his primitive condition to believe in Christ." No one will
   refute this argument, unless by asserting, that God infused a power
   into man, which was of no service, and which could be of none whatever,
   except when man is reduced to that state into which God himself forbids
   him to fall, and into which he cannot fall but through the
   transgression of the Divine command. But I must here be understood as
   always speaking about a power to believe the Gospel and in Christ, as
   distinct from a power of believing in God according to the legal
   prescript.

   THIRDLY. With regard to what belongs to the Conclusion which is to be
   deduced from the preceding, I will burden it only with one absurdity.
   If matters be as they have stated them, "that man in his primeval state
   possessed a power to believe in Christ," when no necessity existed for
   the exercise of such faith in Christ; and if this power was withdrawn
   from him after the fall, when it began to be really necessary for him;
   such a dispensation of God has been very marvelous, and completely
   opposed to the Divine wisdom and goodness, the province of which
   consists in making provision about things necessary for those who live
   under the government and care of these attributes.

   I desist from adding any more; because the absurdity of this dogma will
   not easily obtain credit with such persons as have learned to form a
   judgment from the Scriptures, and not from prejudices previously
   imbibed. I will only subjoin, that this dogma never obtained in the
   church of Christ, nor has it ever been accounted an article relating to
   faith.
     __________________________________________________________________

ARTICLE XX

   It cannot possibly be proved from the Sacred Writings, that the angels
   are now confirmed in their estate.

  ANSWER

   This article also has been besprinkled with calumny; though I am of
   opinion, that it was done in ignorance by him from whose narration it
   is attributed to me. For I did not deny that this fact was incapable of
   proof from the Scriptures; but I inquired of him, "if it be denied,
   with what arguments from Scripture will you prove it?" I am not so rash
   as to say, that no proof can be given from Scripture for a matter,
   whose contrary I am not able satisfactorily to establish by Scripture,
   at least if such proof has not produced certainty in my own mind. For I
   ought to believe, that there are other persons who can prove this,
   though I am myself incapable; as those persons, in like manner, with
   whom I occasionally enter into conversation, ought to believe thus
   concerning themselves because I cannot instantly deny that they are
   unable to do what, I am sure, they will experience much difficulty in
   performing. For they must themselves be aware, that from their frequent
   conversations, and from the sermons which they address to the people,
   some judgment may be formed of their own progress in the knowledge of
   the truth and in understanding the Scriptures. I wish them, therefore
   to undertake the labour of proving that, about which they will not
   allow me to hesitate.

   I know what has been written by St. Augustine, and others of the
   Fathers, about the estate of the angels, about their blessedness, their
   confirmation in good, and the certainty by which they know that they
   will never fall from this condition. I also know, that the schoolmen
   incline towards this opinion. But when I examine the arguments which
   they advance in its support, they do not appear to me to possess such
   strength as may justly entitle it to be prescribed for belief to other
   persons as an approved article of faith.

   The passage generally quoted from St. Matthew, (xxii, 30,) "But they
   are as angels of God in heaven," treats only on the similitude [between
   young children and angels,] in neither marrying nor being given in
   marriage; he does not say, that the angels of God are now happy in
   heaven.

   That in Matt. xviii. 10, "In heaven their angels do always behold the
   face of my Father who is in heaven," does not speak of the beatific
   vision, but of that vision with which those who stand around the throne
   of God wait for his commands. This is apparent from the design of
   Christ, who wished thus to persuade them "not to offend one of these
   little ones;" their beholding God, helps to confirm this persuasion,
   not the beatific sight, but such a sight of God as is suited for the
   reception of the [Divine] commands to keep these little ones.

   "But ye are come to the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable
   company of angels." (Heb. xii. 22. This does not necessarily prove,
   that angels are now blessed and confirmed in good; because, even now,
   those who are neither beatified nor confirmed in good do themselves
   belong to that celestial city, that is, those who are said to have
   "come to this heavenly city," who still "walk by faith," and "see
   through a glass darkly." (1 Cor. xiii. 12.) "Then the angels will be in
   a more unhappy condition than the souls of pious men, who are now
   enjoying blessedness with Christ and in his presence." This reason
   which they adduce is not conclusive. For "the angels are ministering
   spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of eternal
   salvation" This service of theirs will endure to the end of the world.
   In the mean time, "those who have died in the Lord, rest from their
   labours." (Rev. xiv. 13.)

   Neither is that a stronger argument, which says, "It is possible for
   the angels to fall, if they are not confirmed in good; and therefore
   they must always of necessity be tormented by a fear of their fall,
   which may happen; and by a fear which is the greater, on account of the
   clearer knowledge that they have of the evil into which the apostate
   angels are fallen." For it is possible for the angels to be assured of
   their stability, that is, that they shall never fall away, although
   they be neither blessed, nor so far confirmed in that which is good as
   not to be capable of falling. They may be assumed, either with such a
   certainty as excludes all anxious "fear that hath torment," but is
   consistent with that "fear and trembling," with which we are commanded
   to "work out our salvation," who are said to have "the full assurance
   of faith" concerning our salvation.

   But what necessity is there to enter into this disputation, which
   cannot without great difficulty be decided from the Scriptures; and
   which, when it is decided, will be of small service to us. Let us
   rather devote our attention to this study. Doing now the will of God as
   the angels do in heaven, let us endeavour to be enabled hereafter to
   become partakers with them of eternal blessedness. This is especially
   our duty, since the things which have been written for us respecting
   the state of angels, and which are commanded to be received by faith,
   are exceedingly few in number.

   This, therefore, is my reply to the former twenty of these articles,
   which have been ascribed partly to me alone, and partly also to
   Borrius. There is not one of them whose contrary has been believed by
   the Church Universal and held as an article of faith. Some of them,
   however, are so artfully constructed, that those which are their
   opposites savour of novelty and send forth an odour of falsehood.
   Beside the fact, that the greatest part of them are attributed to us
   through calumny. I now proceed to the consideration of the eleven which
   follow that I may see whether the fabricators have acted in a more
   happy and judicious manner, either in imputing them to me, or in
   reckoning them as errors or heresies. May God direct my mind and my
   hand, that I may with a good conscience declare those things which are
   in unison with the truth, and which may conduce to the peace and
   tranquillity of our brethren.

ARTICLE XXI (I.)

   It is a new, heretical and Sabellian mode of speaking, nay, it is
   blasphemous, to say "that the Son of God is autoqeon (very God,)" for
   the Father alone is very God, but not the Son of the Holy Spirit.

  ANSWER

   Most of those persons who are acquainted with me at all, know with what
   deep fear, and with what conscientious solicitude, I treat that sublime
   doctrine of a Trinity of Persons. The whole manner of my teaching
   demonstrates, that when I am explaining this article I take no delight
   either in inventing new phrases, that are unknown to Scripture and to
   orthodox antiquity, or in employing such as have been fabricated by
   others. All my auditors too will testify, how willingly I bear with
   those who adopt a different mode of speaking from my own, provided they
   intend to convey a sound meaning. These things I premise, lest any one
   should suppose, that I had sought to stir up a controversy about this
   word, with other persons who had employed it.

   But when, in the course of a particular disputation, a certain young
   man with much pertinacity and assurance defended not only the word
   itself, but likewise that meaning which I believe and know to be
   contrary to all antiquity, as well as to the truth of the Scriptures,
   and was not backward in expressing his serious disapproval of the more
   orthodox opinions; I was compelled to explain what were my sentiments
   about the word and its meaning.

   I said that the word is not contained in the Scriptures; yet, because
   it had been used by the orthodox, both by Epiphanius, (Heres. 69,) and
   by some divines in our days, I do not reject it, provided it be
   correctly received.

   But it may be received in a two fold signification, according to the
   etymon of the word; and may mean, either one who is truly and in
   himself God, or one who is God from himself. In the former
   signification, I said, the word might be tolerated; but in the latter,
   it was in opposition to the Scriptures and to orthodox antiquity.

   When the opponent still urged, that he received the word in this last
   sense, and that Christ was indeed autoqeon that is,. God from himself,
   who has in reality an essence in common with the Father, but not
   communicated by the Father; and when he asserted this with the greater
   boldness, because he knew that in this opinion he had Trelactrius of
   pious memory agreeing with him, from whose instructions he appeared to
   have derived his ideas on the subject; I said that this opinion was a
   novel one, which was never heard of by the ancients, and unknown both
   to the Greek and Latin Fathers; and that, when rigidly examined, it
   would be found to be heretical, and nearly allied to the opinion of
   Sabellius, which was, that the Father and the Son are not distinct
   persons, but one person called by different names. I added, that, from
   this opinion, the entirely opposite heresy might likewise be deduced,
   which is, that the, Son and the Father are two different persons, and
   two collateral gods; this is blasphemous. I proved my remarks by the
   following brief arguments: FIRST. It is the property of the person of
   the Father, to have his being from himself, or, which is a better
   phrase, to have his being from no one. But the Son is now said to have
   his being from himself, or rather, from no one: therefore, the Son is
   the Father; which is Sabellianism. SECONDLY. If the Son have an essence
   in common with the Father, but not communicated by the Father, he is
   collateral with the Father, and, therefore, they are two gods. Whereas,
   all antiquity defended the unity, the Divine essence in three distinct
   persons, and placed a salvo on it by this single explanation, "that the
   Son has the same essence directly, which is communicated to him by the
   Father; but that the Holy Spirit has the very same essence from the
   Father and the Son."

   This is the explanation which I adduced at that time, and in the
   maintenance of which I still persist: and I affirm, that in this
   opinion I have the Scriptures agreeing with me, as well as the whole of
   antiquity, both of the Greek and the Latin churches. It is therefore
   most wonderful, that our brethren have dared to charge this upon me as
   an erroneous sentiment. Yet, in doing this, they do not act with
   sincerity, since they do not explain the word autoqeon by removing its
   ambiguity; which they undoubtedly ought to have done, lest any person
   should suppose that I denied the Son to be in every sense, and
   therefore that he is not very and true God. This they ought the more
   particularly to have done, because they know that I have always made a
   distinction between these significations, and have admitted one of
   them, but rejected the other.

   Since the matter really stands thus, I might simply accuse this article
   of making a false charge; because in a certain sense I confess the son
   to be autoqeon also the Holy Spirit, and not the Father alone. But, for
   the sake of justifying this phrase and opinion, the framers of it
   declare, "When it is said, the Son is God from himself, then the phrase
   must be received in this sense, the essence which the Son has, is from
   himself, that is, from no one. For the Son is to be considered as he is
   God, and as he is the Son. As God, he has his being from himself. As
   the Son, he has it from the Father. Or two things are to be subjects of
   consideration in the Son, his essence and his relation. According to
   his essence, the Son is from no one or from himself. According to his
   relation, he is from the Father."

   But I answer, FIRST. This mode of explanation cannot, except by an
   impropriety of speech, excuse him who says, "the Son has indeed an
   essence in common with the Father, but not communicated."

   SECONDLY. "The essence, which the Son has, is from no one," is not
   tantamount to the phrase, "the Son, who has an essence, is from no
   one." For, "Son" is the name of a person that has relation to a Father,
   and therefore without that relation it cannot become a subject either
   of definition or of consideration. But "Essence" is something absolute:
   and these two are so circumstanced between themselves, that "essence"
   does not enter into the definition of "Son," except indirectly, thus,
   "he is the Son, who has the Divine essence communicated to him by the
   Father;" which amounts to this, "he is the Son, who is begotten of the
   Father." For, to beget, is to communicate his essence.

   THIRDLY. These two respects in which He is God and in which He is the
   Son, have not the same affection or relation between each other, as
   these two have, "to exist from himself or from no one," and "to exist
   from the Father," or "to have his essence from himself," or "from no
   one," and "to have it from the Father:" which I demonstrate thus by two
   most evident arguments. (1.) "God" and "the Son" are consentaneous and
   subordinate: for the Son is God. But "to derive his being from no one"
   and "to derive it from another," "to have his essence from no one," and
   "to have it from another," are opposites, and cannot be spoken about
   the same person. In the comparison which they institute, those things
   which ought to be collated together are not properly compared, nor are
   they opposed to each of their parallels and classes or affinities. For
   a double ternary must here come under consideration, which is this:

   HE IS GOD: -- HE IS THE FATHER: -- HE IS THE SON:

   He has the Divine essence,: He has it from no one,: He has it from the
   Father:

   These are affinities and parallels. (1.) "He is God," and "has the
   Divine essence." (2.) "He is the Father," and, "has the Divine essence
   from no one." (3.) "He is the Son," and, "has the Divine essence from
   the Father."

   But, by the comparison which our objectors institute in their
   explanation, these things will be laid down as parallels. "He is God,"
   and "has his essence from no one." If this comparison be correctly
   formed, then either the Father alone is God, or there are three
   collateral Gods. But far be it from me to charge with such a sentiment
   as this those who say, "the Son is autoqeon that is, God from himself."
   For I know that they occasionally explain themselves in a modified
   manner. But their explanation does not agree with the phraseology which
   they employ. For this reason Beza excuses Calvin, and openly confesses
   "that he had not with sufficient strictness observed the difference
   between these particles a se and per se."

   I have stated only what follow as consequences from these phrases, and
   from the opinion which agrees with them; and I have therefore said,
   that people must refrain from the use of such phraseology. I abstain
   from proofs, multitudes of which I could bring from the Scriptures and
   the Fathers; and if necessity require, I will immediately produce them:
   for I have had them many years in readiness.

   GOD is from eternity, having the Divine Essence.

   THE FATHER is from no one, having the Divine Essence from no one, which
   others say is "from himself."

   THE SON is from the Father, having the Divine Essence from the Father.

   This is a true parallelism, and one which, if in any manner it be
   inverted or transposed, will be converted into a heresy. So that I
   wonder much, how our brethren could consider it proper to make any
   mention of this matter; from which they would with far more correctness
   and prudence have abstained, if, while meditating upon it, they had
   weighed it in equal balances.
     __________________________________________________________________

ARTICLE XXII (II.)

   It is the summit of blasphemy to say, that God is freely good.

  ANSWER

   In this article likewise, our brethren disclose their own disgraceful
   proceedings, which I would gladly allow to remain buried in oblivion.
   But, because they recall this affair to my recollection, I will now
   relate how it occurred.

   In a disputation, it was asked, "can necessity and liberty be so far
   reconciled to each other, that a person may be said necessarily or
   freely to produce one and the same effect?" These words being used
   properly according to their respective strict definitions, which are
   here subjoined. "An agent acts necessarily, who, when all the
   requisites for action are laid down, cannot do otherwise than act, or
   cannot suspend his acting. An agent acts freely, who, when all the
   requisites for action are laid down, can refrain from beginning to act,
   or can suspend his acting," I declared, "that the two terms could not
   meet in one subject." Other persons said, "that they could," evidently
   for the purpose of confirming the dogma which asserts, "Adam sinned
   freely indeed, and yet necessarily. FREELY, with respect to himself and
   according to his nature: NECESSARILY, with respect to the decree of
   God."

   Of this their explanation I did not admit, but said necessarily and
   freely differ not in respects, but in their entire essences, as do
   necessity and contingency, or what is necessary and what is contingent,
   which, because they divide the whole amplitude of being, cannot
   possibly coincide together, more than can finite and infinite. But
   Liberty appertains to Contingency.

   To disprove this my opinion, they brought forward an instance, or
   example, in which Necessity and Liberty met together; and that was God,
   who is both necessarily and freely good. This assertion of theirs
   displeased me so exceedingly, as to cause me to say, that it was not
   far removed from blasphemy. At this time, I entertain a similar opinion
   about it; and in a few words I thus prove its falsity, absurdity, and
   the blasphemy [contained] in the falsity.

   (1.) Its falsity. He who by natural necessity, and according to his
   very essence and the whole of his nature, is good, nay, who is Goodness
   itself, the Supreme Good, the First Good from whom all good proceeds,
   through whom every good comes, in whom every good exists, and by a
   participation of whom what things soever have any portion of good in
   them are good, and more or less good as they are nearer or more remote
   from it. He is not FREELY good. For it is a contradiction in an
   adjunct, or an opposition in an apposition. But God is good by natural
   necessity, according to his entire nature and essence, and is Goodness
   itself, the supreme and primary Good, from whom, through whom: and in
   whom is all good, &c. Therefore, God is not freely good.

   (2.) Its absurdity. Liberty is an affection of the Divine Will; not of
   the Divine Essence, Understanding, or Power; and therefore it is not an
   affection of the Divine Nature, considered in its totality. It is
   indeed an effect of the will, according to which it is borne towards an
   object that is neither primary nor adequate, and that is different from
   God himself; and this effect of the will, therefore, is posterior in
   order to that affection of the will according to which God is borne
   towards a proper, primary and adequate object, which is himself. But
   Goodness is an affection of the whole of the Divine Nature, Essence,
   Life, Understanding, Will, Power, &c. Therefore, God is not freely
   good; that is, he is not good by the mode of liberty, but by that of
   natural necessity. I add, that it cannot be affirmed of anything in the
   nature of things, that it is freely, or that it is this or that freely,
   not even then when man was made what he is, by actions proceeding from
   free will: as no man is said to be "freely learned," although he has
   obtained erudition for himself by study which proceeded from free will.

   (3.) I prove that blasphemy is contained in this assertion: because, if
   God be freely good, (that is, not by nature and natural necessity,) he
   can be or can be made not good. As whatever any one wills freely, he
   has it in his power not to will; and whatever any one does freely, he
   can refrain from doing. Consider the dispute between the ancient
   Fathers and Eunomius and his followers, who endeavoured to prove that
   the Son was not eternally begotten of the Father, because the Father
   had neither willingly nor unwillingly begotten the Son. But the answer
   given to them by Cyril, Basil, and others, was this: "The Father was
   neither willing nor unwilling; that is, He begat the Son not by will,
   but by nature. The act of generation is not from the Divine Will, but
   from the Divine nature." If they say, "God may also be said to be
   freely good, because He is not good by co-action or force:" I reply,
   not only is co-action repugnant to liberty, but nature is likewise; and
   each of them, nature and co-action, constitutes an entire, total and
   sufficient cause for the exclusion of liberty. Nor does it follow,
   "co-action does not exclude liberty from this thing; therefore, it is
   freely that which it actually is. A stone does not fall downwards by
   co-action; it, therefore, falls by liberty. Man wills not his own
   salvation by force, therefore, he wills it freely." Such objections as
   these are unworthy to be produced by MEN; and in the refutation of them
   shall I expend my time and leisure, Thus, therefore, the Christian
   Fathers justly attached blasphemy to those who said, "the Father begat
   the Son willingly, or by his own will;" because from this it would
   follow, that the Son had an origin similar to that of the creatures.
   But with how much greater equity does blasphemy fasten itself upon
   those who declare, "that God is freely good? For if he be freely good,
   he likewise freely knows and loves himself, and besides does all things
   freely, even when He begets the Son and breathes forth the Holy Spirit.
     __________________________________________________________________

ARTICLE XXIII (III.)

   It frequently happens that a creature who is not entirely hardened in
   evil, is unwilling to perform an action because it is joined with sin;
   unless when certain arguments and occasions are presented to him, which
   act as incitements to its commission. The management of this
   presentation, also, is in the hand of the providence of God, who
   presents these incitements, that he may accomplish his own work by the
   act of the creature.

  ANSWER

   Unless certain persons were under the excitement of a licentious
   appetite for carping at those things which proceed from me, they would
   undoubtedly never have persuaded themselves to create any trouble about
   this matter. Yet, I would pardon them this act of officiousness, as the
   rigid and severe examiners of truth, provided they would sincerely and
   without calumny relate those things which I have actually spoken or
   written; that is, that they would not corrupt or falsify my sayings,
   either by adding to or diminishing from them, by changing them or
   giving them a perverted interpretation. But some men seem to have been
   so long accustomed to slander, that, even when they can be openly
   convicted of it, still they are not afraid of hurling it against an
   innocent person. Of this fact, they afford a luminous example in the
   present article. For those things which I advanced in the Theses, On
   the Efficacy and Righteousness of the Providence of God concerning
   evil, and which were disputed in the month of May, 1605, are here
   quoted, but in a mutilated manner, and with the omission of those
   things which are capable of powerfully vindicating the whole from the
   attacks of slander. The following are the words which I employed in the
   fifteenth thesis of that disputation.

   "But since an act, though it be permitted to the ability and the will
   of the creature, may yet be taken away from his actual power or
   legislation; and since, therefore, it will very frequently happen, that
   a creature, who is not entirely hardened in evil, is unwilling to
   perform an act because it is connected with sin, unless when some
   arguments and occasions are presented to him, which resemble
   incitements to its commission. The management of this presenting (of
   arguments and occasions) is also in the hand of the Providence of God,
   who presents these incitements, both that He may fully try whether the
   creature be willing to refrain from sinning, even when urged on, or
   provoked, by incitements; because the praise of abstaining from sin is
   very slight, in the absence of such provocatives; and that, if the
   creature wills to yield to these incitements, God may effect his own
   work by the act of the creature."

   These are my words from which the brethren have extracted what seemed
   suitable for establishing the slander, but have omitted and quite taken
   away those things which, in the most manifest manner, betray and
   confute the calumny. For I laid down two ends of that administration by
   which God manages the arguments, occasions, incitements, and
   irritatives to commit that act which is joined with sin. And these two
   ends were neither collateral, that is, not equally intended; nor were
   they connected together by a close conjunction. The FIRST of them,
   which is the exploration or trial of his creature, God primarily,
   properly, and of himself intends. But the LATTER, which is, that God
   may effect his own work by the act of the creature, is not intended by
   God, except after he has foreseen that his Creature will not resist
   these incitements, but will yield to them, and that of his own free
   will, in opposition to the command of God, which it was his duty and
   within his power to follow, after having rejected and refused those
   allurements and incitements of arguments and occasions. But this
   article of theirs propounds my words in such a way, as if I had made
   God to intend this last end only and of itself, omitting entirely the
   first; and thus omitting the previous condition under which God intends
   this second end through the act of his creature, that is, when it is
   the will of the creature to yield to these incitements.

   This calumny, therefore, is two-fold, and evidently invented for the
   purpose of drawing a conclusion from these, my words -- that I have in
   them represented God as the author of sin. A certain person, having
   lately quoted my expressions in a public discourse, was not afraid of
   drawing from them this conclusion. But this was purely through calumny,
   as I will now prove with the utmost brevity.

   The reason by which it can be concluded, from the words that have been
   quoted in this article from my Thesis, "that God is the author of the
   sin which is committed by the creature," when God incites him by
   arguments and occasions, is universally, three-fold:

   The FIRST is, that God absolutely intends to effect his own work by the
   act of the creature, which act cannot be performed by the creature
   without sin. This is resolvable into two absolute intentions of God, of
   which the first is that by which he absolutely intends to effect this,
   his work; and the second, that by which he absolutely intends to effect
   this work in no other way, than by such an act of a creature as cannot
   be done by that creature without sin.

   The SECOND REASON IS, that the creature being invited by the presenting
   of these allurements and provocatives to commit that act, cannot do
   otherwise than commit it; that is, such an excitation being laid down,
   the creature cannot suspend that act by which God intends to erect his
   work, otherwise God might be frustrated of his intention: Hence arises

   The THIRD REASON which has its origin in these two--that God intends by
   these incentives to move the creature to perform an act which is joined
   to sin, that is, to move him to the commission of sin.

   All these things seem, with some semblance of probability, to be drawn
   as conclusions from the words thus placed, as they are quoted in this
   their article, because it is represented as the sole and absolute end
   of this administration and presenting-that God effects his work by the
   act of the creature. But those words which I have inserted, and which
   they have omitted, meet these three reasons, and in the most solid
   manner, confute the whole objection which rests upon them.

   1. My own words meet the FIRST of these reasons thus: For they deny
   that God absolutely intends to effect his own work by the act of the
   creature; because they say that God did not intend to employ the act of
   the creature to complete his work, before he foresaw that the creature
   would yield to those incitements, that is, would not resist them.

   2. They meet the SECOND by denying that, after assigning this
   presentation of incitements, the creature is unable to suspend his act;
   since they say, likewise, that, if it be the will of the creature to
   yield to these incitements, then God effects his own work by the act of
   the creature. What does this mean if it be his will to yield? Is not
   the freedom of the will openly denoted, by which, when this presenting
   of arguments and occasions is laid down, the will can yet refuse to
   yield,

   3. They also meet the THIRD: For they deny that God intends by those
   incitements to move the creature to the commission of an act which is
   joined to sin, that is, to commit sin, because they say, that God
   intends the trial of his creature, whether he will obey God even after
   having been irritated by these incitements. And when God saw that the
   creature preferred to yield to these incitements, rather than to obey
   him, then he intended, not the act of the creature, for that is
   unnecessary; because, his intention being now to try, he obtains the
   issue of the act performed by the will of the creature. But God
   intended to effect his own work by an act founded on the will and the
   culpability of the creature.

   It is apparent, therefore, that these words which my brethren have
   omitted, most manifestly refute the calumny, and in the strongest
   manner solve the objection. This I will likewise point out in another
   method, that the whole iniquity of this objection may be rendered quite
   obvious.

   That man who says, "God tries his creature by arguments and occasions
   of sinning, whether he will obey him even after he has been stirred up
   by incitements," openly declares that it is in the power of the
   creature to resist these incitements, and not to sin: otherwise, this
   [act of God] would be, not a trial of obedience, but a casting down,
   and an impelling to necessary disobedience. Then, the man who
   says--"God, by these provocatives and incitements, tries the obedience
   of his creature," intimates by these expressions, that those occasions
   and arguments which are presented by God when he intends to try, are
   not incitements and irritations to sin, through the end and aim of God.
   But they are incitements, first, by capability according to the
   inclination of the creature who can be incited by them to commit an act
   connected with sin. They are also incitements, secondly, in their
   issue, because the creature has been induced by them to sin, but by his
   own fault; for it was his duty, and in his power, to resist this
   inclination, and to neglect and despise these incitements.

   It is wonderful, therefore, and most wonderful indeed, that any man, at
   all expert in theological matters, should have ventured to fabricate
   from my words this calumny against me. Against me, I say, who dare not
   accede to some of the sentiments and dogmas of my brethren, as they
   well know, for this sole reason--because I consider it flows from them
   that God is the author of sin. And I cannot accede to them on this
   account--because I think my brethren teach those things from which I
   can conclude by good and certain consequence, that God absolutely
   intends the sin of his creature, and thence, that he so administers all
   things, as, when this administration is laid down, man necessarily
   sins, and cannot, in the act itself, and in reality, omit the act of
   sin. If they shew that the things which I say, do not follow from their
   sentiments, on this account at least, I shall not suffer myself to be
   moved by their consent in them. Let the entire theses be read, and it
   will be evident how solicitously I have guarded against saying any
   thing, from which by the most distant probability, this blasphemy might
   be deduced; and yet, at the same time, I have been careful to subtract
   from the providence of God nothing, which, according to the Scriptures,
   ought to be ascribed to it. But I scarcely think it necessary, for me
   now to prove at great length, that the fact of God's providential
   efficacy respecting evil is exactly as I have taught in those words;
   especially after I have premised this explanation. I will, however, do
   this in a very brief manner.

   Eve was not only "a creature not entirely hardened in evil," but she
   was not at all evil; and she willed to abstain from eating the
   forbidden fruit because "it was connected with sin," as is apparent
   from the answer which she gave to the serpent: "God hath, said, Ye
   shall not eat of it." Her compliance with this command was easy, in the
   midst of such an abundance of fruit; and the trial of her obedience
   would have been very small, if she had been solicited with no other
   argument by the tempter. It happened, therefore, that, in addition to
   this, the serpent presented to Eve an argument of persuasion, by which
   he might stimulate her to eat, saying, "Ye shall not surely die, but ye
   shall be as gods." This argument, according to the intention of the
   serpent, was an incitement to commit sin: Without it, the serpent
   perceived, she would not be moved to eat, because he had heard her
   expressing her will to abstain from the act because it was "connected
   with sin."

   I ask now, Is the whole management of this temptation to be ascribed to
   God, or not? If they say, "It must not be attributed to him," they
   offend against Providence, the Scriptures, and the opinion of all our
   divines. If they confess that it should be ascribed to him, they grant
   what I have said. But what was the end of this management? An
   experiment, or trial, whether Eve, when solicited by arguments, and
   stimulated by Satan, would resolve to refrain from an act, that she
   might obtain from her Lord and Creator, the praise of obedience. The
   instance of Joseph's brethren, which is quoted in the fifteenth thesis
   of my ninth public disputation, proves this in the plainest manner, as
   I have shown in that thesis.

   Let the case of Absalom be inspected, who committed incest with his
   father's concubines. Was not this the occasion of perpetrating that
   act--God gave his father's concubines into his hands, that is, he
   permitted them to his power. Was not the argument inducing him to
   commit that act, from which nature is abhorrent, furnished by the
   advice of Ahithophel, whose counsels were considered as oracles? (2
   Sam. xvi. 20-23.) Without doubt, these are the real facts of the case.
   But that God himself managed the whole of this affair, appears from the
   Scripture, which says that God did it. (2 Sam. xii. 11-12.)

   Examine what God says in Deut. xiii. 1-3, "Thou shalt not obey the
   words of that prophet, who persuades thee to worship other gods,
   although he may have given thee a sign or a wonder which may have
   actually come to pass? Is not the diction of "the sign," [by this false
   prophet,] when confirmed by the event itself, an argument which may
   gain credit for him? And is not the credit, thus obtained, an
   incitement, or an argument to effect a full persuasion of that which
   this prophet persuaded? And what necessity is there for arguments,
   incitements and incentives, if a rational creature has such a
   propensity to the act, which cannot be committed without sin, that he
   wills to commit it without any argument whatsoever, Under such
   circumstances, the grand tempter will cease from his useless labour.
   But because the tempter knows, that the creature is unwilling to commit
   this act, unless he be incited by arguments, and opportunities be
   offered, he brings forward all that he can of incentives to allure the
   creature to sin. God, however, presides over all these things, and by
   his Providence administers the whole of them, but to an end far
   different from that to which the temptor directs them. For God manages
   them, in the first place, for the trial of his creatures, and,
   afterwards, (if it be the will of the creature to yield,) for Himself
   to effect something by that act.

   If any think, that there is something reprehensible in this view, let
   them so circumscribe the right and the capability of God, as to suppose
   Him unable to try the obedience of his creature by any other method,
   than by creating that in which sin can be committed, and from which He
   commanded him by a law to abstain. But if He can try the obedience of
   his creature by some other method than this, let these persons shew us
   what that method is beside the presenting of arguments and occasions,
   and why God uses the former method more than the preceding one which I
   have mentioned. Is it not because he perceives, that the creature will
   not, by the former, be equally strongly solicited to evil, and that
   therefore it is a trivial matter to abstain from sin, to the commission
   of which he is not instigated by any other incentives?

   Let the history of Job be well considered, whose patience God tried in
   such a variety of ways, and to whom were presented so many incitements
   to sin against God by impatience; and the whole of this matter will
   very evidently appear. God said to Satan; "Hast thou considered my
   servant Job, a perfect and an upright man, one that feareth God and
   departeth from evil,." Satan answered the Lord and said: "What wonder
   is there in this, since thou hast so abundantly blessed him. But try
   him now by afflictions." And the Lord said unto Satan: "Behold, all
   that he hath is in thy power. Only upon himself put not forth thine
   hand." What other meaning have these words than, "Behold, incite him to
   curse me! I grant thee permission, since thou thinkest small praise is
   due to that man who abounds with blessings, and yet fears me. Satan did
   what he was permitted, and produced none of the effects; [which he had
   prognosticated]; so that God said, "Job still holdeth fast his
   integrity, although thou movedst me against him." (ii, 3.) This trial
   being finished, when Satan asked permission to employ against him
   greater incentives to sin, he obtained his request; and, after all,
   effected nothing. Therefore God was glorified in the patience of Job,
   to the confusion of Satan.

   I suppose these remarks will be sufficient to free the words of my
   Theses from all calumny and from sinister and unjust interpretations.
   When I have ascertained the arguments which our brethren employ to
   convict these words of error, I will endeavour to confute them; or if I
   cannot do this, I will field to what may then be deemed the truth.
     __________________________________________________________________

ARTICLE XXIV (IV.)

   The Righteousness of Christ is not imputed to us for Righteousness; but
   to believe [or the act of believing] justifies us.

  ANSWER

   I do not know what I can most admire in this article--the
   unskillfulness, the malice, or the supine negligence of those who have
   been its fabricators! (1.) Their NEGLIGENCE is apparent in this, that
   they do not care how and in what words they enunciate the sentiments
   which they attribute to me; neither do they give themselves any trouble
   to know what my sentiments are, which yet they are desirous to
   reprehend. (2.) Their UNSKILLFULNESS. Because they do not distinguish
   the things which ought to be distinguished, and they oppose those
   things which ought not to be opposed. (3.) The MALICE is evident,
   because they attribute to me those things which I have neither thought
   nor spoken; or because they involve matters in such a way as to give
   that which was correctly spoken the appearance of having been uttered
   in perverseness, that they may discover some grounds for calumny. But,
   to come to the affair itself.

   Though in this article there seem to be only two distinct enunciations,
   yet in potency they are three, which must also be separated from each
   other to render the matter intelligible. The FIRST is, "the
   righteousness of Christ is imputed to us." SECOND, "the righteousness
   of Christ is imputed for righteousness." THIRD, "the act of believing
   is imputed for righteousness." For thus ought they to have spoken, if
   their purpose was correctly to retain my words; because the expression,
   "justifies us," is of wider acceptation than, "is imputed for
   righteousness." For God justifies, and it is not imputed for
   righteousness. Christ, "the righteous servant of God, justifies many by
   his knowledge." But that by which He thus does this, is not "imputed
   for righteousness."

   1. With regard to the FIRST. I never said, "the righteousness of Christ
   is not imputed to us." Nay, I asserted the contrary in my Nineteenth
   Public Disputation on Justification, Thesis 10. "The righteousness by
   which we are justified before God may in an accommodated sense be
   called imputative, as being righteousness either in the gracious
   estimation of God, since it does not according to the rigor of right or
   of law merit that appellation, or as being the righteousness of
   another, that is, of Christ, it is made ours by the gracious imputation
   of God." I have, it is true, placed these two in alternation. By this
   very thing I declare, that I do not disapprove of that phrase. "The
   righteousness of Christ is imputed to us, because it is made ours by
   the gracious estimation of God," is tantamount to, "it is imputed to
   us;" for "imputation" is "a gracious estimation." But lest any one
   should seize on these expressions as an occasion for calumny, I say,
   that I acknowledge, "the righteousness of Christ is imputed to us"
   because I think the same thing is contained in the following words of
   the Apostle, "God hath made Christ to be sin for us, that we might be
   made the righteousness of God in Him." (2 Cor. v. 21.)

   2. I have said, that I disapprove of the SECOND enunciation, "the
   righteousness of Christ is imputed to us for righteousness." And why
   may not I reject a phrase which does not occur in the Scriptures,
   provided I do not deny any true signification which can be proved from
   the Scriptures? But this is the reason of my rejection of that phrase.
   "Whatever is imputed for righteousness, or to righteousness, or instead
   of righteousness, it is not righteousness itself strictly and rigidly
   taken. But the righteousness of Christ, which He hath performed in
   obeying the Father, is righteousness itself strictly and rigidly taken.
   THEREFORE, it is not imputed for righteousness." For that is the
   signification of the word "to impute," as Piscator against Bellarmine,
   when treating on justification, (from Romans iv. 4,) has well observed
   and safisfactorily proved.

   The matter may be rendered clearer by an example. If a man who owes
   another a hundred florins, pays this his creditor the hundred which he
   owes, the creditor will not speak with correctness if he says, "I
   impute this to you for payment." For the debtor will instantly reply,
   "I do not care any thing about your imputation;" because he has truly
   paid the hundred florins, whether the creditor thus esteems it or not.
   But if the man owe a hundred florins and pay only ten, then the
   creditor, forgiving him the remainder, may justly say, "I impute this
   to you for full payment; I will require nothing more from you." This is
   the gracious reckoning of the creditor, which the debtor ought also to
   acknowledge with a grateful mind. It is such an estimation as I
   understand as often as I speak about the imputation of the
   righteousness which is revealed in the Gospel, whether the obedience of
   Christ be said to be imputed to us, and to be our righteousness before
   God, or whether faith be said to be imputed for righteousness. There
   is, therefore, a crafty design latent in this confusion. For if I deny
   this, their enunciation, they will say I deny that the righteousness of
   Christ is imputed to us. If I assent to it, I fall into the absurdity
   of thinking that the righteousness of Christ is not righteousness
   itself. If they say, that the word "impute" is received in a different
   acceptation, let them prove their assertion by an example; and when
   they have given proof of this, (which will be a work of great
   difficulty to them,) they will have effected nothing. For "the
   righteousness of Christ is imputed to us by the gracious estimation of
   God." It is imputed, therefore, either by the gracious estimation of
   God for righteousness; or it is imputed by his non-gracious estimation.
   If it be imputed by His gracious estimation for righteousness, (which
   must be asserted,) and if it be imputed by His nongracious estimation;
   then it is apparent, in this confusion of these two axioms, that the
   word "impute" must be understood ambiguously, and that it has two
   meanings.

   3. The THIRD is thus enunciated: "Faith, or the act of believing, is
   imputed for righteousness" which are my own words. But omitting my
   expressions, they have substituted for them the phrase, "The act of
   believing justifies us." I should say, "They have done this in their
   simplicity," if I thought they had not read the fourth chapter of the
   Epistle to the Romans, in which this phrase is used eleven times,

   "Faith, or the act of believing, is imputed for righteousness." Thus it
   is said in the third verse, "Abraham believed God, and it was imputed
   unto him for righteousness; that is, his believing was thus imputed.
   Our brethren, therefore, do not reprehend ME, but the APOSTLE, who has
   employed this phrase so many times in one chapter, and who does not
   refrain from the use of the other phrase, "to be justified by faith,
   and through faith," in the third and fifth chapters of the same
   epistle. They ought, therefore, to have reprehended, not the phrase
   itself, but the signification which I attach to it, if I explain it in
   a perverted manner. Thus incorrectly should I seem to have explained
   the Apostle's phrase if I had said, "the righteousness of Christ is not
   imputed to us or does not justify us, but faith, or the act of
   believing, does." But I have already replied, that this assertion
   concerning me is untrue, and I have declared that I believe both these
   expressions to be true, "the righteousness of Christ is imputed to us,"
   and "faith is imputed for righteousness." When they place these phrases
   in opposition to each other, they do this, not from the meaning which I
   affix to them, but from their own; and, therefore, according to the
   signification which they give to them severally, they fabricate this
   calumny, which is an act of iniquity. But they will say, that I
   understand this phrase, "Faith is imputed for righteousness," in its
   proper acceptation, when it must be figuratively understood. This they
   ought, therefore, to have said, because this alone is what they were
   able to say with truth. Such in fact are my real sentiments on this
   subject; and the words make for the proper acceptation of the phrase.
   If a figure lies concealed under it, this ought to be proved by those
   who make the assertion.
     __________________________________________________________________

ARTICLE XXV (V.)

   The whole of that in which we appear before God, justifies us. But we
   appear before God, not only by Faith, but also by Works. Therefore, we
   are justified before God, not only by Faith, but likewise by Works.

  ANSWER

   A man who is ignorant of those things which are here the order of the
   day, and who reads this article, will undoubtedly think, that, in the
   point of justification, I favour the party of the Papists, and am their
   professed defender. Nay, he will suppose, that I have proceeded to such
   a pitch of impudence, as to have the audacity to maintain a conclusion
   directly contrary to the words of the Apostle, who says, "We conclude,
   therefore, that a man is justified by faith, without the works of the
   law." But when he shall understand the origin of this article, and why
   it is charged on me, then it will be evident to him that it arises from
   calumny and from a corruption of my words. I deny, therefore, that I
   made that syllogism, or ever intended to draw that conclusion, or to
   propound those things from which such a conclusion might be deduced.

   This brief defense would suffice for all upright minds, to give a
   favourable interpretation, if perchance anything had been spoken which
   could give occasion to unjust suspicion. But it will be labour well
   bestowed, for me to transcribe my own words from a certain disputation
   on JUSTIFICATION, from which this article has been taken; that it may
   appear with what kind of fidelity they have made their extract. The
   Ninth Thesis in it is thus expressed:

   "From these things, thus laid down according to the Scriptures, we
   conclude, that JUSTIFICATION, when used for the act of a judge, is
   either purely the imputation of righteousness, bestowed, through mercy
   from the throne of grace in Christ the Propitiation, on a sinner, but
   on one who believes; or that man is justified before God, of debt,
   according to the rigor of justice, without any forgiveness. Because the
   Papists deny the latter, they ought to concede the former. And this is
   so far true, that, how highly soever any one of the saints may be
   endowed with faith, hope, and charity, and how numerous soever and
   excellent may be the works of faith, hope, and charity, which he has
   performed, yet he will not obtain from God, the judge, a sentence of
   justification, unless He quit the tribunal of His severe justice, and
   place Himself in the throne of Grace, and out of it pronounce a
   sentence of absolution in his favour, and unless the Lord of his mercy
   and pity, graciously account for righteousness the whole of that good
   with which the saint appears before Him. For woe to a life of the
   greatest innocence, if it be judged without mercy! This truth even the
   Papists seem to acknowledge, who assert, that the works of the saints
   cannot stand before the judgment of God, unless they be sprinkled with
   the blood of Christ."' (Public Disput. XIX.)

   Thus far my Thesis. Could any person imagine that the major in this
   article can, according to my sentiments and design, be deduced from it,
   "The whole of that in which we appear before God, justifies us;" how
   can this be deduced, when I say, "that not even this good, which the
   Papists are able or know how to attribute to the most holy men, can
   obtain from God a sentence of justification, unless He, through mercy
   from the throne of grace, reckon this graciously for righteousness."
   Who does not perceive, that I grant this through sufferance and
   concession?" "God considers and esteems for righteousness all this good
   in which, the Papists say, the saints appear before God." I yield this,
   that I may the more firmly confute them; and I thus obtain, "that not
   even that total can be accounted for righteousness, except graciously
   and through mercy." This conduct is real malignity, and a violent
   distortion of my words; on account of which I have indeed no small
   occasion given to me of complaining before God of this injury. But I
   contain myself, lest my complaint to God should be detrimental to their
   souls; I would rather beseech God to be pleased to grant them a better
   mind.

   The matter, with regard to me, stands thus; as if any one should say to
   a Monk or a Pharisee, who was boasting of his virtues and works of his
   faith, hope, love, obedience, voluntary chastity and similar
   excellences: "O man! unless God were to omit the severity of his
   justice, and unless from the throne of Grace, He were to pronounce a
   sentence of absolution concerning thee, unless He were graciously to
   reckon all that good of thine, however great it may be, and thus to
   account it for righteousness, thou wouldst not be able to stand before
   Him, or to be justified." I declare, and before Christ I make the
   declaration, that this was my meaning. And every man is the best
   interpreter of his own expressions. But let it be allowed, that I have
   said these things from my own sentiments; was this proposition [of
   their fabrication] to be deduced from my words? If it was, they ought
   to have proceeded thus according to scientific method. They ought to
   have briefly laid down the enunciation which I employed, and which
   might be in this form: "Unless God graciously account for righteousness
   the whole of this good in which a saint appears before Him, that saint
   cannot be justified before God." From which will be deduced this
   affirmative proposition, "If God graciously accounts for righteousness
   this good in which a holy man appears, then this holy man can be
   justified before God," or "he will then be justified before God" The
   word "the whole," has a place in the negative proposition; because it
   conduces to the exaggeration. But it ought not to have a place in that
   which is affirmative. Let this question, however, have a place here:
   Why have my brethren omitted these words? "The Lord graciously of his
   mercy, from the throne of his Grace, having omitted the severity of
   judgment, accounts that good for righteousness." And why have they
   proposed only these? "The whole of that in which we appear before God,
   justifies us." This is, indeed, not to deny the fact; but a pretext is
   thus sought for calumny, under the equivocation of the word
   "justifies," as justification may be either of grace, or of debt or
   severe judgment. But I have excluded that which is of debt or severe
   judgment from my expressions, and have included only the justification
   which is of grace. Let these remarks suffice for the major proposition.

   I now proceed to the assumption that they have subjoined to this
   proposition, which is theirs and not mine. It reads thus: "But we
   appear before God, not only by Faith, but also by Works" Then is it
   your pleasure, my brethren, to appear thus before God? David was not of
   this opinion, when he said:

   "Enter not into judgment with thy servant. For in thy sight shall no
   man living be justified," or "shall justify himself." (Psalm cxliii.
   2.) Which is thus rendered by the Apostle Paul, "For by the works of
   the law shall no flesh be justified." (Gal. ii. 16.) But perhaps you
   will say, that you do not appear before God "by the works of the law,
   but by works produced from faith and love." I wish you to explain to
   me, what it is to appear by faith, and what to appear by works; and
   whether it can possibly happen, that a man may appear both by faith and
   works. I know, the saints who will be placed before the tribunal of the
   Divine Justice, have had Faith, and through Faith have performed good
   Works. But, I think, they appear and stand before God with this
   confidence or trust, "that God has set forth his Son Jesus Christ as a
   propitiation through Faith in his blood, that they may thus be
   justified by the Faith of Jesus Christ, through the remission of sins."
   I do not read, that Christ is constituted a propitiation through Works
   in his blood, that we may also be justified by Works.

   My desire indeed is, to appear before the tribunal of God thus, [with
   this confidence or trust in Christ, as a propitiation through Faith in
   his blood] and "to be graciously judged through mercy from the throne
   of grace". If I be otherwise judged, I know I shall be condemned; which
   sore judgment may the Lord, who is full of clemency and pity, avert
   according to his great mercy, even from you, my brethren, though you
   thus speak, whether the words which you use convey your own meaning, or
   whether you attribute this meaning to me. I also might thus draw
   wonderful conclusions from this assumption, which is laid down, if an
   accusation were to be set aside by retaliation or a recriminating
   charge, and not by innocence. But I will not resort to such a course,
   lest I seem to return evil for evil; though I might do this with a
   somewhat greater show of reason.
     __________________________________________________________________

ARTICLE XXVI (VI.)

   Faith is not the instrument of Justification.

  ANSWER

   IN THE enunciation of this article is given another proof of desperate
   and finished negligence. What man is so utterly senseless as
   universally to deny, that Faith can be called "an instrument," since it
   receives and apprehends the promises which God has given, and does also
   in this way concur to justification, But who, on the other hand, will
   venture to say, that, in the business of justification, faith has no
   other relation than that of an instrument? It should therefore be
   explained, how faith is an instrument, and how, as an instrument, it
   concurs to justification.

   It is, at least, not the instrument of God; not that which He uses to
   justify us. Yet this is the meaning first intended to be conveyed by
   these words, when rigidly taken. For God is the primary cause of
   justification. But since justification is an estimate of the mind,
   although made at the command of the will, it is not performed by an
   instrument. For it is when God wills and acts by his power, that He
   employs instruments. Then, in these words, "Believe in Christ, and thy
   sins shall be forgiven thee," or, which is the same thing, "and thou
   shalt be justified;" I say, that faith is the requirement of God, and
   the act of the believer when he answers the requirement. But they will
   say, "that it is the act of apprehending and accepting, and that
   therefore, this faith bears relation to an instrument?' I reply, faith
   as a quality has in that passage relation to the mode of an instrument;
   but the acceptance or apprehension itself is an act, and indeed one of
   obedience, yielded to the gospel. Let that phrase likewise which is so
   often used by the Apostle in Romans 6, be seriously considered, "Faith
   is imputed for righteousness." Is this faith as an instrument, or as an
   act? St. Paul resolves the question, by a quotation from the book of
   Genesis, when he says, "Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him
   for righteousness." The thing itself, as it is explained by our
   brethren, also solves the question. "Faith is imputed for righteousness
   on account of Christ, the object which it apprehends." Let this be
   granted. Yet the apprehending of Christ is nearer than the instrument
   which apprehends, or by which He is apprehended. But apprehending is an
   act; therefore, faith, not as it is an instrument, but as it is an act,
   is imputed for righteousness, although such imputation be made on
   account of Him whom it apprehends. In brief, the capability or the
   quality by which any thing is apprehended, and the apprehension itself,
   have each relation to the object which is to be apprehended, the former
   a mediate relation, the latter an immediate. The latter, therefore, is
   a more modest metonymy, as being derived from that which is nearer;
   even when it is granted that this phrase, "it is imputed for
   righteousness"--must be explained by a metonymy. The man, then, who
   says, "the act of faith is imputed for righteousness, does not deny
   that faith as an instrument concurs to justification. It is evident,
   therefore, from this answer, that our brethren fabricate and "get up"
   articles of this kind without the least care or solicitude, and charge
   me with them. This, I think, will be acknowledged even by themselves,
   if they examine how they manufactured those nine questions which, two
   years ago, by the consent of their Lordships the Curators of our
   University, they endeavoured to offer to the Professors of Divinity,
   that they might obtain their reply to them. Gravity and sobriety are
   highly becoming in Divines, and serious solicitude is required to the
   completion of such great matters as these.
     __________________________________________________________________

ARTICLE XXVII (VII.)

   Faith is not the pure gift of God, but depends partly on the grace of
   God, and partly on the powers of Free Will; that, if a man will, he may
   believe or not believe.

  ANSWER

   I never said this, I never thought of saying it, and, relying on God's
   grace, I never will enunciate my sentiments on matters of this
   description in a manner thus desperate and confused. I simply affirm,
   that this enunciation is false, "faith is not the pure gift of God;"
   that this is likewise false, if taken according to the rigor of the
   words, "faith depends partly on the grace of God, and partly on the
   powers of free will" and that this is also false when thus enunciated,
   "If a man will, he can believe or not believe." If they suppose, that I
   hold some opinions from which these assertions may by good consequence
   be deduced, why do they not quote my words? It is a species of
   injustice to attach to any person those consequences, which one may
   frame out of his words as if they were his sentiments. But the
   injustice is still more flagrant, if these conclusions cannot by good
   consequence be deduced from what he has said. Let my brethren,
   therefore, make the experiment, whether they can deduce such
   consectaries as these, from the things which I teach; but let the
   experiment be made in my company, and not by themselves in their own
   circle. For that sport will be vain, equally void of profit or of
   victory; as boys sometimes feel, when they play alone with dice for
   what already belongs to them.

   For the proper explanation of this matter, a discussion on the
   concurrence and agreement of Divine grace and of free will, or of the
   human will, would be required; but because this would be a labour much
   too prolix, I shall not now make the attempt. To explain the matter I
   will employ a simile, which yet, I confess, is very dissimilar; but its
   dissimilitude is greatly in favour of my sentiments. A rich man
   bestows, on a poor and famishing beggar, alms by which he may be able
   to maintain himself and his family. Does it cease to be a pure gift,
   because the beggar extends his hand to receive it? Can it be said with
   propriety, that "the alms depended partly on the liberality of the
   Donor, and partly on the liberty of the Receiver," though the latter
   would not have possessed the alms unless he had received it by
   stretching out his hand? Can it be correctly said, because the beggar
   is always prepared to receive, that "he can have the alms, or not have
   it, just as he pleases?" If these assertions cannot be truly made about
   a beggar who receives alms, how much less can they be made about the
   gift of faith, for the receiving of which far more acts of Divine grace
   are required! This is the question which it will be requisite to
   discuss, "what acts of Divine grace are required to produce faith in
   man?" If I omit any act which is necessary, or which concurs, [in the
   production of faith,] let it be demonstrated from the Scriptures, and I
   will add it to the rest.

   It is not our wish to do the least injury to Divine grace, by taking
   from it any thing that belongs to it. But let my brethren take care,
   that they themselves neither inflict an injury on Divine justice, by
   attributing that to it which it refuses; nor on Divine grace, by
   transforming it into something else, which cannot be called GRACE. That
   I may in one word intimate what they must prove, such a transformation
   they effect when they represent "the sufficient and efficacious grace,
   which is necessary to salvation, to be irresistible," or as acting with
   such potency that it cannot be resisted by any free creature.
     __________________________________________________________________

ARTICLE XXVIII (VIII.)

   The grace sufficient for salvation is conferred on the Elect, and on
   the Non-elect; that, if they will, they may believe or not believe, may
   be saved or not saved.

  ANSWER

   OUR brethren here also manifest the same negligence. They take no pains
   to know what my sentiments are; they are not careful in examining what
   truth there is in my opinions; and they exercise no discretion about
   the words in which they enunciate my sentiments and their own. They
   know that I use the word "Election" in two senses. (i.) For the decree
   by which God resolves to justify believers and to condemn unbelievers,
   and which is called by the Apostle, "the purpose of God according to
   election." (Rom. ix. 11.) (ii.) And for the decree by which He resolves
   to elect these or those nations and men with the design of
   communicating to them the means of faith, but to pass by other nations
   and men. Yet, without this distinction, they fasten these sentiments on
   me; when, by its aid, I am enabled to affirm, not only, sufficient
   grace is conferred on, or rather is offered to, the Elect and the
   Nonelect;" but also, "sufficient grace is not offered to any except the
   Elect." (i.) "It is offered to the Elect and the Non-elect," because it
   is offered to unbelievers, whether they will afterwards believe or not
   believe. (ii.) "It is offered to none except the Elect," because, by
   that very thing which is offered to them, they cease to be of the
   number of those of whom it is said, "He suffered them to walk in their
   own ways;" (Acts xiv. 16;) and, "He hath not dealt so with any nation."
   (Psalm cxlvii. 20.) And who shall compel me to use words of their
   prescribing, unless proof be brought from scripture that the words are
   to be thus and in no other way received?

   I now proceed to the other words of the article. "That, if they will,
   they may believe or not believe, be saved or not saved." I say, in two
   different senses may these words be received, "if they will, they may
   believe," that is, either by their own powers, or as they are excited
   and assisted by this grace. "Or they may not believe," while rejecting
   this grace by their own free will, and resisting it. "They may be saved
   or not saved," that is, saved by the admission and right use of grace,
   not saved by their own wickedness, rejecting that without which they
   cannot be saved.

   To the whole together I reply, that nothing is declared in these words,
   in whatever manner they may be understood, which St. Augustine himself
   and his followers would not willingly have acknowledged as true. I say,
   in these words are enunciated the very sentiments of St. Augustine; yet
   he was the chief champion against the Pelagian heresy, being accounted
   in that age its most successful combatant. For in his treatise on
   nature and grace, (c. 67.) St. Augustine speaks thus:, Since He is
   every where present, who, by many methods through the creature that is
   subservient to Him as his Lord, can call him who is averse, can teach a
   believer, can comfort him who hopes, can exhort the diligent man, can
   aid him who strives, and can lend an attentive ear to him who
   deprecates; it is not imputed to thee as a fault, that thou art
   unwillingly ignorant, but that thou neglectest to inquire after that of
   which thou art ignorant; not that thou dost not collect and bind
   together the shattered and wounded members, but that thou despisest Him
   who is willing to heal thee." The book entitled "The Vocation of the
   Gentiles," which is attributed with a greater semblance of probability
   to Prosper, than to St. Ambrose, has the following passage: "On all men
   has always been bestowed some measure of heavenly doctrine, which,
   though it was of more sparing and hidden grace, was yet sufficient, as
   the Lord has judged, to serve some men for a remedy, and all men for a
   testimony." (Lib. 2. c. 5.) In the commencement of the ninth chapter of
   the same book, he explains the whole matter by saying: "The Grace of
   God has indeed the decided pre-eminence in our justifications,
   persuading us by exhortations, admonishing us by examples, affrighting
   us by dangers, exciting us by miracles, by giving understanding, by
   inspiring counsel, and by illuminating the heart itself and imbuing it
   with the affections of faith. But the will of man is likewise subjoined
   to it and is united with it, which has been excited to this by the
   before mentioned succours, that it may co-operate in the Divine work
   within itself, and may begin to follow after the reward which, by the
   heavenly seed, it has conceived for the object of its desire, ascribing
   the failure to its own mutability, and the success (if the issue be
   prosperous) to the aid of grace. This aid is afforded to all men, by
   innumerable methods both secret and manifest; and the rejection of this
   assistance by many persons, is to be ascribed to their negligence; but
   its reception by many persons, is both of Divine grace and of the human
   will."

   I do not produce these passages, as if I thought that either my
   brethren or I must abide by the sentiments of the Fathers, but only for
   the purpose of removing from myself the crime of Pelagianism in this
   matter.
     __________________________________________________________________

ARTICLE XXIX (IX.)

   Believers can perfectly fulfill the Law, and live in the world without
   sin.

  ANSWER

   This is what I never said. But when a certain person once, in a public
   disputation on the Baptism of Infants, was endeavouring, by a long
   digression, to bring me to the point either to declare that believers
   could perfectly fulfill the law of God, or that they could not--I
   declined an answer, but quoted the opinion of St. Augustine, from the
   second book of his Treatise On the demerits and remission of sins,
   against the Pelagians. That passage, I will here transcribe, that I may
   defend myself against the charge of Pelagianism; because, I perceive
   that the men with whom I have to do, consider even these sentiments to
   be Pelagian, though they can on no count whatever, be reckoned such.

   St. Augustine says: "We must not instantly with an incautious rashness,
   oppose those who assert that it is possible for man to be in this life
   without sin. For if we deny the possibility of this, we shall derogate
   both from the free will of man, which desires to be in such a perfect
   state by willing it; and from the power or mercy of God, who effects it
   by the assistance which He affords. But it is one question whether it
   be possible, and another whether such a man actually exists. It is one
   question, if such a perfect man is not in existence when it is
   possible, why is he not? And it is another, not only whether there is
   any one who has never had any sin at all, but likewise, whether there
   could at any time have been such a man, or that it is now possible? In
   this fourfold proposal of questions, if I be asked "is it possible for
   a man to exist in the present life without sin;" I shall confess, that
   it is possible by the grace of God, and by man's free will." (Cap. 6.)

   In another of his works, St. Augustine says: "Pelagius disputes
   correctly, that they confess it not to be impossible, by the very
   circumstance of either many or all persons wishing to do it; [perfectly
   to fulfill the law of God;] but let him confess whence it is possible,
   and peace is instantly established. For the possibility arises from the
   grace of God through Christ Jesus," &c. (On Nature and Grace, against
   the Pelagians, cap. 59, 60.) And in a subsequent passage: "For it may
   be made a question among true and pious Christians, has there ever
   been, is there now, or can there be, in this life, any man who lives so
   justly as to have no sin at all? Whosoever doubts about the possibility
   of the existence of such a person after this life, he is destitute of
   understanding. But I am unwilling to enter into a contest, about this
   possibility even in the present life." See the paragraphs which
   immediately succeed in the same chapter. And in the 69th chapter of
   that work, he says: "By the very thing, by which we most firmly believe
   that a just and good God could not command impossibilities, we are
   admonished both of what we may do in things easy of accomplishment, and
   of what we may ask in matters of difficulty; because all things are
   easy to charity," &c.

   I do not oppose this opinion of St. Augustine; but I do not enter into
   a contest about any part of the whole matter. For I think the time may
   be far more happily and usefully employed in prayers to obtain what is
   lacking in each of us, and in serious admonitions that every one
   endeavour to proceed and to press forward towards the mark of
   perfection, than when spent in such disputations.

   But my brethren will say, that in the 114th question of our Catechism
   this very subject is treated, and that it is there asked, "Can those
   persons who are converted to God, perfectly observe the Divine
   Commands," The answer subjoined is, "By no means." To this observation
   I reply, that I do not say anything against it; but that the reason of
   the negative answer [or scriptural proof added] is about the act, when
   the question itself is about the possibility; and that, therefore, from
   this, nothing is proved. It is also well known that this answer had
   been rejected by some persons; and that it was only by the intervention
   of the brethren, who added an explanation to it, that it afterwards
   obtained the approbation of the same individuals. But I shall be
   perfectly willing to enter into a conference with my brethren about
   this matter, whenever it shall be convenient; and I hope we shall
   easily agree in opinion.
     __________________________________________________________________

ARTICLE XXX (X.)

   It may admit of discussion, whether Semi-Pelagianism is not real
   Christianity.

  ANSWER

   In a certain lecture I said, that it would be easy, under the pretext
   of Pelagianism, to condemn all those things of which we do not approve,
   if we may invent half, quarter, three-fourths, four-fifths Pelagianism,
   and so upwards. And I added, that it might admit of discussion whether
   Semi-Pelagian is not real Christianity. By these remarks it was not my
   wish to patronize Pelagian doctrine; but I was desirous to intimate,
   that something might be accounted as Semi-Pelagianism which does not
   depart from the truth of Christian doctrine. For as, when a departure
   is once made from the truth, the descent towards falsehood becomes more
   and more rapid; so, by receding from falsehood, it is possible for men
   to arrive at truth, which is often accustomed to stand as the mean
   between two extremes of falsehood. Such indeed is the state of the
   matter in Pelagianism and Manicheism. If any man can enter on a middle
   way between these two heresies, he will be a true Catholic, neither
   inflicting an injury on Grace, as the Pelagians do, nor on Free Will as
   do the Manichees. Let the Refutation be perused which St. Augustine
   wrote against both these heresies, and it will appear that he makes
   this very acknowledgement. For this reason it has happened, that, for
   the sake of confirming their different opinions, St. Augustine's words,
   when writing against the Manichees, have been frequently quoted by the
   Pelagians; and those which he wrote against the Pelagians, have been
   quoted by the Manichees.

   This, therefore, is what I intended to convey; and that my brethren may
   understand my meaning, I declare openly, "that it will be quite as easy
   a task for me to convict the sentiments of some among them of
   Manicheism, and even of Stoicism, as they will be really capable of
   convicting others of Pelagianism, whom they suspect of holding that
   error." But I wish us all to abstain from odious names of this
   description, as they are employed without producing any benefit. For he
   who is accused will either deny that his sentiments are the same as
   those of Pelagius; or, if he acknowledges the existence of a
   similarity, he will say that Pelagius was wrongly condemned by the
   Church. It would be better then to omit these epithets, and to confer
   solely about the matter itself; unless, approaching to the opinion of
   the Papists, we hold that what has once been determined by the Church,
   cannot be drawn into controversy.
     __________________________________________________________________

ARTICLE XXXI (XI.)

   It is not correctly said in the Catechism, that "God is angry with us
   for birth-sins;" because original sin is a punishment. But whatever is
   a punishment is not properly a sin.

  ANSWER

   Nearly two months ago, a certain minister of God's word, came to me,
   desirous, as he declared, to confer with me about the opinion which I
   held concerning the Catechism and Dutch Confession being subjected to
   examination in our National Synod. On this subject we had some
   conversation together, and I concluded the expression of my opinion
   with this syllogism:

   "Every human writing which is not in itself entitled to implicit
   credit, not authentic, and not divine, may be examined, and indeed
   ought to be; when it can be done in order, and after a legitimate
   manner, that is, in a Synod, to which [the consideration of] these
   writings belongs. But such productions are the Catechism and our
   Confession. Therefore, they may and ought to be subjected to
   examination." When he had wearied himself in opposing a few things to
   this syllogism, which I soon dispersed by the clearest light of truth,
   he began to inquire what [objections] they were which I had against the
   Confession and Catechism; I replied, that I had nothing against those
   formularies, for that would be an act of prejudging, which I would not
   take upon myself; but that there were matters in those two productions,
   about which it was my wish to confer in a legitimate and orderly
   manner, with my brethren at their own time, in a Synod, whether on
   every point they be agreeable to the scriptures, or whether they
   dissent in any respect from them. For this purpose, that if, after a
   serious and strict examination, they be found to agree with the
   scriptures, they may be approved and confirmed by recent and fresh
   sanctions; or that, if found to dissent from them, they may be
   corrected as commodiously as possible.

   He became urgent with me, therefore, and requested that I would
   disclose to him those points about which I was desirous to confer; and
   he declared, that he asked this favour for no other reason than that he
   might be able himself to think seriously about them. Unwilling
   positively to deny this his request, I began to produce some parts of
   the Confession, and especially the fourteenth Article. But he said,
   "that he made small account of this, because he thought something might
   easily be discovered in the Confession, which did not perfectly and in
   every respect correspond with the scriptures, at least with regard to
   its phraseology, for it was the composition of only a few persons, and
   in fact was written in the earliest times of the Reformation from
   Popery; and that he perceived very little danger in the Confession
   being corrected in some passages, since it was not much in use among
   the people."

   But when he began to be still more urgent concerning the Catechism,
   desirous in that particular likewise to gratify him, I adduced some
   passages, and, among others, the answer to the tenth question, in which
   God is said "by horrid methods to be angry both on account of
   birth-sins, and on account of those also which we ourselves commit,"
   &c. I said two things, in these words, might admit of discussion. (1.)
   Whether we could correctly call this universal taint in our nature
   "birth-sins" in the plural number. I had scarcely made this remark,
   when he, without waiting for any further explanation, said, "that on
   one occasion, while he was explaining the Catechism to some students,
   he had himself begun to think whether it was a good and proper phrase;
   but that he had defended it by this argument--The Catechism employs the
   plural number on account of original sin itself, and on account of the
   sin committed by Adam which was the cause of that original sin." But as
   I considered that kind of defense to be unworthy of any confutation, I
   said, it was better for him at once to own that these words required
   emendation, than to give such an explanation of them. After this
   conversation, I added another remark. (2.) It may admit of discussion,
   whether God could be angry on account of original sin which was born
   with us, since it seemed to be inflicted on us by God as a punishment
   of the actual sin which had been committed by Adam and by us in Him.
   For, in that case, the progress would be infinite, if God, angry on
   account of the actual sin of Adam, were to punish us with this original
   sin; were He again to be angry with us for this original sin, and
   inflict on us another punishment; and, for a similar cause were He a
   third time to be angry on account of that second punishment which had
   been inflicted, guilt and punishment thus mutually and frequently
   succeeding each other, without the intervention of any actual sin. When
   to this observation he replied, "that still it was sin." I said, I did
   not deny that it was sin, but it was not actual sin. And I quoted the
   seventh chapter of the Epistle to the. Romans, in which the Apostle
   treats on the sin, and says that "it produces in the unregenerate all
   manner of concupiscence," thus intimating that we must distinguish
   between actual sin, and that which was the cause of other sins, and
   which, on this very account might be denominated "sin."

   Matters were at that interview discussed between us in this placid
   manner, and for the purpose which I have just stated; and I know that I
   never spoke upon this subject in any other place. Yet this our
   conversation was related to a certain learned man, the very same day on
   which it occurred, either by the minister himself, or by some one who
   had heard it from him. I had it from the lips of this learned man
   himself; who urged it against me as an objection, within a few days
   after the minister and I had held this discourse: for the minister had
   resided at this learned man's house, during his stay in Leyden.

   Is it equitable that things which are thus discussed among brethren for
   the sake of conference, should be instantly disseminated, and publicly
   proclaimed as heretical? I confess that I am devoid of all discernment,
   if such conduct as this is not the very violation of the law of all
   familiarity and friendship. Yet these are the persons who complain,
   that I decline to confer with them; that, when I am calmly asked, I
   refuse to declare my sentiments; and that I hold their minds in
   suspense.

   To this article, therefore, I briefly reply: It is false that I said,
   "that this is not correctly expressed in the Catechism." For I told
   that minister openly, that I would not prejudge the matter; that I was
   desirous to wait for the judgment of my brethren on matters of this
   kind, and on others which were comprised in the Catechism and
   Confession; and that, after things had been thus maturely and
   accurately weighed, something determinate might be concluded.

   But a previous conference of this description seems to be attended with
   some utility on this account, it prevents any man from offering to the
   Synod itself for examination and abjudication those matters which, by
   such a private conversation as this, he might understand to have no
   difficulties in them. Let the brethren recall to mind what was asked of
   the Professors of Divinity in our University, by the Synod of South
   Holland, held at Gorchum, and let them compare it among themselves. We
   are asked diligently to read through the Confession and Catechism, and,
   if we find anything in them which merits animadversion, to announce the
   same seasonably and in order. And this, on my own part, I promised to
   do. For this purpose, is not a private conference with brethren highly
   useful, that what can be removed by it may not be proposed to the Synod
   for discussion, But that minister and I had known each other for many
   years; I had also long held epistolary correspondence with him, and had
   conversed with him on the articles of faith. On this account therefore,
   I thought that I ought to comply with his request, as an experiment
   whether he could expedite the affair.
     __________________________________________________________________

CONCLUSION

   THIS then is the answer which I have thought proper to make, at
   present, to the THIRTY-ONE ARTICLES that have been objected against me.
   If I have not given satisfaction by it to some men, I am prepared to
   confer in order with any of them upon these subjects and others which
   pertain to the Christian Religion, for this purpose, that we may either
   agree in our sentiments; or, if this result cannot be obtained by a
   conference, that we bear with each other, when it has become evident
   how far we severally proceed together in the matter of religion, and
   what things they are of which we approve or disapprove, and that these
   points of difference are not of such a description as to forbid
   professors of the same religion to hold different sentiments about
   them.

   Some persons perhaps will reproach me with "appearing sometimes to
   answer with doubt and desitation, when it is the duty of a Divine and a
   Professor of Theology to be fully persuaded about those things which he
   will teach to others, and not to fluctuate in his opinions." To these
   persons I wish to reply.

   1. The most learned man, and he who is most conversant with the
   Scriptures, is ignorant of many things, and is always but a scholar in
   the school of Christ and of the Scriptures. But one, who is thus
   ignorant of many things, cannot, without hesitation, give answer in
   reference to all things about which an opportunity or necessity for
   speaking is presented either by adversaries or by those who wish to ask
   and ascertain his sentiments by private or public conference and
   disputation. For it is better for him to speak somewhat doubtfully,
   than dogmatically, about those things of which he has no certain
   knowledge; and to intimate that he himself requires daily progress, and
   seeks for instruction as well as they. For I think no one has proceeded
   to such a pitch of audacity, as to style himself a master that is
   ignorant of nothing, and that indulges no doubts about any matter
   whatever.

   2. It is not everything which becomes a subject of controversy that is
   of equal importance. Some things are of such a nature as to render it
   unlawful for any man to feel a doubt concerning them, if he have any
   wish to be called by the name of Christian. But there are other things
   which are not of the same dignity, and about which those who treat on
   catholic sentiments [such orthodox doctrines as are held by all real
   Christians,] have dissented from each other, without any breach of
   truth and Christian peace. Of what description those subjects may be
   which are discussed in these Articles, and about which I have appeared
   to answer with hesitation, and whether they be of absolute necessity,
   may likewise become in due time a topic of discussion.

   3. My reply [to these thirty-one articles] is not peremptory:

   Not that I have in them said anything against conscience, but because I
   did not consider it requisite to bring forward, in the first instance,
   all those things which I might be able to say. I accounted my answer
   sufficient, and more than sufficient, for all those objections, which
   have not the slightest foundation on any reasons whatsoever; not only
   because they were untruly charged against me, but because they did not
   impinge against the truth of the Scriptures. In the greater number of
   these Articles, I might have discharged the whole of my duty, in simply
   denying them, and in demanding proof. But I have gone further than
   this, that I might in some degree give satisfaction, and that I might
   besides challenge my brethren to a conference, if they should think it
   necessary. This I will never decline, provided it be lawfully
   instituted, and in such a manner as to inspire hopes of any benefits to
   be derived from it. If after that conference it be discovered that,
   either because I am ignorant of necessary things which ought to be
   taught in the Church and in the University; or because I hold unsound
   opinions about articles on which some importance is placed for
   obtaining salvation and for the illustration of divine glory; or
   because I doubt concerning such things as ought to be delivered
   dogmatically and inculcated with seriousness and rigor, if for these
   reasons it be discovered that, according to this our unhappy [natural]
   condition, I am unworthy to hold any office in the Church or
   University, (for who is sufficient for these things,) I will, without
   reluctance, resign my situation, and give place to a man possessed of
   greater merit.

   But I wish to advise my brethren, particularly those of them who are my
   juniors, and who have not "their senses so much exercised" in the
   Scriptures as to be enabled to deliver out of those Scriptures
   determinate opinions about all things, that they be not too bold in
   asserting anything, of which when required to give their reasons, they
   will be able with great difficulty to produce them; and, besides, that
   they be sedulously on their guard lest, after they have strenuously
   affirmed anything which I call in doubt without employing the contrary
   affirmation, and it be discovered that the arguments which I employ in
   justification of my doubts are stronger than those on which they rely
   in that their affirmation, they incur the charge of immodesty and
   arrogance among men of prudence, and from this very circumstance be
   accounted unworthy of the place which they hold with so much
   presumption. For it becomes a Bishop and a Teacher of the Church, not
   only to hold fast the faithful word as he hath been taught, that he may
   be able by his sound doctrine, both to exhort and to convince the
   gainsayers, (Tit. i. 9,7,) but likewise not to be given to self-will,
   arrogance, and boldness. Into which faults novices easily fall, (1 Tim.
   iii. 6,)who, "by their inexperience, are unacquainted with the vast
   difficulty with which the eye of the inward man is healed, that it may
   be enabled to look upon its sun; with the sighs and groans by which we
   are able in any small degree to attain to an understanding of God; with
   the labour necessary for the discovery of truth; and with the
   difficulty of avoiding errors." Let them consider, that nothing is more
   easy for them, than not only to assert, but also to think, that they
   have discovered the truth. But they will themselves at length
   acknowledge the real difficulties with which the discovery is attended,
   when with seriousness and earnestness they enter into a conference
   about the matters in controversy, and have after a rigid examination
   discussed all those things which may have been alleged on both sides.
     __________________________________________________________________

NINE QUESTIONS

   Exhibited, by the Deputies of the Synod, to Their Lordships the
   Curators of the University of Leyden, for the Purpose of Obtaining an
   Answer to each of them from the Professors of Divinity; and the Replies
   which James Arminius Gave to them, in November, 1605. With Other Nine
   Opposite Questions

  THE NINE QUESTIONS...AND NINE OPPOSITE QUESTIONS
     __________________________________________________________________

   I. Which is first, Election, or Faith Truly Foreseen, so that God
   elected his people according to faith foreseen?

   I. Is the decree "for bestowing Faith on any one," previous to that by
   which is appointed "the Necessity of Faith to salvation?"

   ANSWER TO THIS QUESTION

   The equivocation in the word "Election," makes it impossible to answer
   this question in any other manner, than by distinction. If therefore
   "Election" denotes "the decree which is according to election
   concerning the justification and salvation of believers." I say
   Election is prior to Faith, as being that by which Faith is appointed
   as the means of obtaining salvation. But if it signifies "the decree by
   which God determines to bestow salvation on some one," then Faith
   foreseen is prior to Election. For as believers alone are saved, so
   only believers are predestinated to salvation. But the Scriptures know
   no Election, by which God precisely and absolutely has determined to
   save anyone without having first considered him as a believer. For such
   an Election would be at variance with the decree by which he hath
   determined to save none but believers.
     __________________________________________________________________

   QUESTION AND..... QUESTION REVERSED

   II. If it be said, "that God, by his eternal decree, has determined and
   governs all things and every thing, even the depraved wills of men, to
   appointed good ends," does it follow from this, that God is the author
   of sin?

   II. Is "to determine or direct all things and every thing, even the
   depraved wills of men, to appointed good ends," the same thing as "to
   determine that man be made corrupt, by which a way may be opened for
   executing God's absolute decree concerning damning some men through
   wrath, and saving others through mercy?"

   ANSWER TO THIS QUESTION

   Sin is the transgression of the law; therefore, God will be the author
   of sin, if He cause any man to transgress the law. This is done by
   denying or taking away what is necessary for fulfilling the law, or by
   impelling men to sin. But if this "determination" be that of a will
   which is already depraved, since it does not signify the denying or the
   removing of grace nor a corrupt impelling to sin, it follows, that the
   consequence of this cannot be that God is the author of sin. But if
   this "determination" denote the decree of God by which He resolved that
   the will should become depraved, and that man should commit sin, then
   it follows from this that God is the author of sin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   QUESTION AND.....QUESTION REVERSED

   III. Does original sin, of itself, render man obnoxious to eternal
   death, even without the addition of any actual sin? Or is the guilt of
   original sin taken away from all and every one by the benefits of
   Christ the Mediator?

   III. If some men are condemned solely on account of the sin committed
   by Adam, and others on account of their rejection of the Gospel, are
   there not two peremptory decrees concerning the damnation of men, and
   two judgments, one Legal, the other Evangelical?

   ANSWER TO THIS QUESTION

   Those things which in this question are placed in opposition to each
   other, easily agree together. For original sin can render man obnoxious
   to eternal death, and its guilt can be taken away from all men by
   Christ. Indeed, in order that guilt may be removed, it is necessary
   that men be previously rendered guilty. But to reply to each part
   separately: It is perversely said, that "original sin renders a man
   obnoxious to death," since that sin is the punishment of Adam's actual
   sin, which punishment is preceded by guilt, that is, an obligation to
   the punishment denounced by the law. With regard to the second member
   of the question, it is very easily answered by the distinction of the
   soliciting, obtaining, and the application of the benefits of Christ.
   For as a participation of Christ's benefits consists in faith alone, it
   follows that, if among these benefits "deliverance from this guilt" be
   one, believers only are delivered from it, since they are those upon
   whom the wrath of God does not abide.
     __________________________________________________________________

   QUESTION AND.....QUESTION REVERSED

   IV. Are the works of the unregenerate, which proceed from the powers of
   nature, so pleasing to God, as to induce Him on account of them to
   confer supernatural and saving grace on those who perform them?

   IV. Are a serious consciousness of sin, and an initial fear so pleasing
   to God, that by them He is induced to forgive sins, and to create a
   filial fear?

   ANSWER TO THIS QUESTION

   Christ says, "To him that hath shall be given, and from him that hath
   not shall be taken away even that which he hath." Not, indeed, because
   such is the worthiness and the excellence of the use of any blessing
   conferred by God, either according to nature or to grace, that God
   should be moved by its merits to confer greater benefits; but, because
   such are the benignity and liberality of God, that, though these works
   are unworthy, yet He rewards them with a larger blessing. Therefore, as
   the word "pleasing" admits of two meanings, we can reply to the
   question proposed in two ways - - either affirmatively, if that word be
   viewed as signifying "to please," "to find favour in his eyes," and "to
   obtain complacency for itself;" or negatively if "placeo" be received
   for that which it also signifies, "to please by its own excellence."
   Yet it might be said, that good works are rewarded, in a moral view,
   not so much through the powers of nature, as by some operation in them
   of the Holy Spirit.
     __________________________________________________________________

   QUESTION AND.....QUESTION REVERSED

   V. Can God now, in his own right, require faith from fallen man in
   Christ, which he cannot have of himself? But does God bestow on all and
   every one, to whom the Gospel is preached, sufficient grace by which
   they may believe, if they will?

   V. Can God require that man to believe in Jesus Christ, for whom He has
   determined by an absolute decree that Christ should not die, and to
   whom by the same decree He has determined to refuse the grace necessary
   for believing?

   ANSWER TO THIS QUESTION

   The parts of this question are not opposed to each other; on the
   contrary, they are at the most perfect agreement. So that the latter
   clause may be considered the rendering of a reason, why God may require
   from fallen man faith in Christ, which he cannot have of himself. For
   God may require this, since he has determined to bestow on man
   sufficient grace by which he may believe. Perhaps, therefore, the
   question may be thus corrected: "Can God, now, in his own right, demand
   from fallen man faith in Christ, which he cannot have of himself,
   though God neither bestows on him, nor is ready to bestow, sufficient
   grace by which he may believe?" This question will be answered by a
   direct negative. God cannot by any right demand from fallen man faith
   in Christ, which he cannot have of himself, except God has either
   bestowed, or is ready to bestow, sufficient grace by which he may
   believe if he will. Nor do I perceive what is false in that reply, or
   to what heresy it has affinity. It has no alliance with the Pelagian
   heresy: for Pelagius maintained, that with the exception of the
   preaching of the Gospel, no internal grace is required to produce faith
   in the minds of men. But what is of more consequence, this reply is not
   opposed to St. Augustine's doctrine of Predestination; "yet this
   doctrine of his, we do not account it necessary to establish," as
   Innocent, the Roman Pontiff, has observed.
     __________________________________________________________________

   QUESTION AND.....QUESTION REVERSED

   VI. Is justifying faith the effect and the mere gift of God alone, who
   calls, illuminates, and reforms the will? and is it peculiar to the
   elect alone from all eternity?

   VI. Can that be called a mere gift which, though offered by the pure
   liberality of Him who makes the offer, is still capable of being
   rejected by him to whom it is offered? But does a voluntary acceptance
   render it unworthy of the name of a gift? It may likewise be asked, "Is
   faith bestowed on these who are to be saved? Or is salvation bestowed
   on those who have faith?" Or can both these questions be answered
   affirmatively in a different respect? If they can, how is it then that
   there is not in those decrees a circle, in which nothing is first and
   nothing last?

   ANSWER TO THIS QUESTION

   A double question requires a double answer. (1.) To the first I reply,
   Faith is the effect of God illuminating the mind and sealing the heart,
   and it is his mere gift. (2.) To the second I answer, by making a
   distinction in the word Election. If it be understood as signifying
   Election to salvation; since this, according to the scriptures, is the
   election of believers, it cannot be said, "Faith is bestowed on the
   elect, or on those who are to be saved," but that "believers are
   elected and saved." But if it be received for the decree by which God
   determines variously to administer the means necessary to salvation; in
   this sense I say that Faith is the gift of God, which is conferred on
   those only whom He hath chosen to this, that they may hear the word of
   God, and be made partakers of the Holy Spirit.
     __________________________________________________________________

   QUESTION AND.....QUESTION REVERSED

   VII. May every one who is a true believer be assured in this life of
   his individual salvation; and is it his duty to have this assurance?

   VII. Does justifying faith precede, in the order of nature, remission
   of sins, or does it not? And can any man be bound to any other faith
   than that which justifies?

   ANSWER TO THIS QUESTION

   Since God promises eternal life to all who believe in Christ, it is
   impossible for him who believes, and who knows that he believes, to
   doubt of his own salvation, unless he doubts of this willingness of God
   [to perform his promise.] But God does not require him to be better
   assured of his individual salvation as a duty which must be performed
   to himself or to Christ; but it is a consequence of that promise, by
   which God engages to bestow eternal life on him who believes.
     __________________________________________________________________

   QUESTION AND.....QUESTION REVERSED

   VIII. May true believers and elect persons entirely lose faith for a
   season?

   VIII. May any man who has faith and retains it, arrive at such a
   moment, as, if he were then to die, he would be damned?


   ANSWER TO THIS QUESTION

   Since Election to salvation comprehends within its limits not only
   Faith, but likewise perseverance in Faith; and since St. Augustine
   says, "God has chosen to salvation those who he sees will afterwards
   believe by the aid of his preventing or preceding grace, and who will
   persevere by the aid of his subsequent or following grace; "believers
   and the elect are not correctly taken for the same persons. Omitting,
   therefore, all notice of the word "Election," I reply, believers are
   sometimes so circumstanced, as not to produce, for a season, any effect
   of true faith, not even the actual apprehension of grace and the
   promises of God, nor confidence or trust in God and Christ; yet this is
   the very thing which is necessary to obtain salvation. But the apostle
   says, concerning faith, in reference to its being a quality and a
   capability of believing, "some, having cast away a good conscience
   concerning faith, have made shipwreck."
     __________________________________________________________________

   QUESTION AND.....QUESTION REVERSED

   IX. Can believers under the grace of the New Covenant, perfectly
   observe the law of God in this life?

   IX. May God, or may He not, require of those who are partakers of the
   New Covenant, that the flesh do not lust against the Spirit, as a duty
   corresponding with the grace of that covenant?

   ANSWER TO THIS QUESTION

   The performance of the law is to be estimated according to the mind of
   Him who requires it to be observed. The answer will be two-fold, since
   He either wills it to be rigidly observed in the highest degree of
   perfection, or only according to epieikeian clemency; that is, if he
   require this according to clemency, and if the strength or powers which
   he confers be proportionate to the demand. (1.) Man cannot perfectly
   perform such a law of God, if it be considered as to be performed
   according to rigor. (2.) But if he require it according to clemency,
   and if the powers conferred be proportionate, (which must be
   acknowledged, since He requires it according to the evangelical
   covenant,) the answer is, it can be perfectly observed. But the
   question about capability is not of such great importance, "provided a
   man confesses that it is possible to be done by the grace of Christ,"
   as St. Augustine justly observes.
     __________________________________________________________________

  REMARKS ON THE PRECEDING QUESTIONS, AND ON THOSE OPPOSED TO THEM

   In reply to some queries which Uytenbogard had addressed to Arminius,
   concerning these nine questions and their opposites, the latter gave
   his friend the following explanation, in a letter dated the 31st of
   January, 160vi,

   "I. In answer to the First Question, this is the order of the decrees.
   (1.) It is my will to save believers. (2.) On this man I will bestow
   faith and preserve him in it. (3.) I will save this man. For thus does
   the first of these decrees prescribe, which must necessarily be placed
   foremost; because, without this, faith is not necessary to salvation,
   and therefore no necessity exists to administer the means for faith.
   But to this is directly opposed the opinion which asserts, that faith
   is bestowed on him on whom God had previously willed to bestow
   salvation. For, in this case, it would be his will to save one who did
   not believe. All that has been said about the difference of the decree
   and its execution, is futile; as if, in fact, God willed salvation to
   any one prior to faith, and yet not to bestow salvation on any others
   than believers. For, beside the consistent agreement of these, [the
   decree and its execution,] it is certain that God cannot will to bestow
   that which, on account of his previous decree, He cannot bestow. As
   therefore faith is, in a general manner, placed before salvation by the
   first decree; so it must, specially and particularly, be placed before
   the salvation of this and that man, even in the special decree which
   has the subsequent execution.

   "III. To the Third Question I shall in preference oppose the following:
   Has God determined peremptorily to act with some men according to the
   strict rigor of the law, as He did with the fallen angels, and to act
   with others according to the grace of the Gospel? If they deny this, I
   have what I wish. But if they affirm it, such a sentiment must be
   overwhelmed with absurdities; because in such a case God would have
   acted towards many men with greater severity, than towards the fallen
   angels, who, as being creatures purely spiritual, each sinned of
   himself, through his own wickedness without persuasion from any one.

   "IV. They will not be able to deny my Fourth opposite Question. For
   remission is promised to those who confess their sins; and the fear is
   called initial in reference to the filial fear which follows. If they
   acknowledge it, but say, Yet God is not induced by them;' I will then
   command them to erase the same word out of their interrogatory, and in
   a better form to enunciate their own opinion.

   "V. They will not consider it their duty entirely to deny my Fifth
   opposing Question. If they affirm it, they will declare a falsehood,
   and will incur the ill opinion of all prudent persons, even of those
   who are weak. Let them therefore search out what they may place as an
   intermediate postulate between theirs and mine, and I will then show
   that it co-incides either with their postulate or with mine.

   "VI. I have placed two questions in opposition to the Sixth, because
   their question is also a double one. On the First of them you require
   no observation. About the Second I have said, for the sake of
   explanation, that it is a circle, in which nothing is first and nothing
   last,' but in every part of it a beginning and an end are found--which
   cannot, without absurdity, have place in the decrees of God. I ask, has
   God determined to bestow salvation on those who believe, or to bestow
   faith on those who are to be saved? If both of these be asserted, I
   ask, which of them is the first, and which the last? They will reply,
   neither; and it is then a circle. If they affirm the latter, that God
   has determined to bestow faith on those who are to be saved; I will
   prove, that He has determined to bestow salvation on those who believe,
   and shall then have formed a circle, notwithstanding their
   unwillingness. If they adduce the different respect, I will endeavour
   to confute it; which cannot be a work of much difficulty in so very
   plain a matter.

   "VII. In the Seventh opposite Question, I had regard to the expression,
   is it his duty? for about its possibility there is no contention. But
   justifying faith is not that by which I believe that my sins are
   remitted; for thus the same thing will be the object and the effect of
   justifying faith. By this [justifying faith] I obtain remission of
   sins, therefore it precedes the other object; [the remission of sins;]
   and no one can believe that his sins are remitted, unless he knows that
   he believes by a justifying faith. For this reason, also, no one can
   believe that his future sins will likewise be remitted, unless he knows
   that he will believe to the end. For sins are forgiven to him who
   believes, and only after they have been committed; wherefore the
   promise of forgiveness, which is that of the New Testament, must be
   considered as depending on a condition stipulated by God, that is
   FAITH, without which there is no covenant.

   "VIII. With respect to the Eighth Question, let a distinction be made
   between Faith as it is a quality or habit, and between the same as it
   is an art. Actual believing justifies, or the act of believing is
   imputed for righteousness. Because God requires actual faith; for our
   capability to perform which, He infuses that which is habitual.
   Therefore, as actual faith does not consist with moral sin, he who
   falls into mortal sin may be damned. But it is possible for a believer
   to fall into mortal sin, of which David is seen as an instance
   Therefore, he may fall at such a moment as, if he were then to die, he
   would be damned. If our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence
   toward God.' Therefore, if it does condemn us, we have no confidence,
   we cannot have any; because God is greater than our heart, and knoweth
   all things.' What is said about the impossibility of this event,
   because, God has determined not to take such persons out of the world
   at that moment, conduces nothing in favour of their hypothesis. For
   this is opposed to final destruction, not to temporary, and to their
   total destruction for a season, which is the subject of their Eighth
   Question.

   "IX. If it be replied to my Ninth opposing Question, that, in the
   covenant of grace, God requires a duty which is impossible to man; they
   will be forced to confess, that, in addition to this covenant, another
   is necessary, according to which God pardons a duty not performed
   according to that covenant of grace; as it was necessary that there
   should be another covenant, by which God might pardon a duty not
   performed according to the legal covenant. And thus shall we proceed on
   ad infinitum. At length we must arrive at the point from which we can
   say, God save sinners, of his infinite mercy, which is limited by no
   conditions prescribed by his equity. This seems to be an expression
   which will be entirely conformable to the whole doctrine of those who
   urge absolute predestination, For, since wrath and mercy are opposed to
   each other, as wrath is infinite, may not mercy too, be infinite?
   According to their doctrine, whatever they oppose to the contrary,
   wrath makes men sinners, that it may have those whom it can punish. But
   they expressly say, mercy makes men believers by an omnipotent force,
   and preserves them from the possibility of falling, that it may have
   those whom it can save. But, as Nicasius Van der Schuer says, if God
   could make a sinner, that He might have one whom He could punish; He
   could also punish without sin; therefore He could likewise mercifully
   save without faith. And as Wrath willed to have a just title for
   damnation, through the intervention of sin, so it became Mercy to save,
   without the intervention of any duty, that it might be manifest that
   the whole is of mercy without the semblance of justice. I say, without
   the semblance of justice; because it begets faith by an irresistible
   force, and by an irresistible force it causes man to continue in faith
   to the end, and thus necessarily to be saved, according to the decree,
   he that believes and perseveres, shall be saved This being laid down,
   all equity is excluded, as well from the decree of predestination to
   salvation, as from that of predestination to death. These objections, I
   am conscientiously of opinion, may, without calumny, be made to their
   sentiments; and I am prepared to maintain this very thing against any
   patron whatsoever of those sentiments. For they do not extricate
   themselves when they say, that man spontaneously sins, and believes by
   a spontaneous motion. For that which is spontaneous, and that which is
   natural, are not in opposition. And that which is spontaneous coincides
   with that which is absolutely necessary; as, a stone is moved
   downwards; a beast eats, and propagates its species; man loves that
   which is good for himself. But all excuses terminate in this
   spontaneous matter."

   The passage immediately subsequent to this, is the one which I have
   quoted in pages 179, 180 of the First Volume of these Works, respecting
   the two sick persons who were desirous of obtaining an assurance of the
   Divine Favour, and respecting the very important distinction to be
   observed between a faith which is merely historical, and that by which
   a sinner is justified, a distinction, the neglect of which has, in
   every age of the Church, been a prolific source of error among the
   professors of our common Christianity.
     __________________________________________________________________

                    Public Disputations James Arminius, D.D.

TWENTY-FIVE PUBLIC DISPUTATIONS

   The Authority & Certainty Of The Sacred Scriptures

   Sufficiency & Perfection Of Scripture Vs. Tradition

   Sufficiency & Perfection Of Scriptures Vs. Human Traditions

   On The Nature Of God

   The Person Of The Father & The Son

   The Holy Spirit

   The First Sin Of The First Man

   On Actual Sins

   The Righteousness Of God's Providence Concerning Evil

   The Righteousness Of God's Providence Concerning Evil

   The Free Will Of Man And Its Powers

   The Law Of God

   The Comparison Of The Law & The Gospel

   The Offices Of Our Lord Jesus Christ

   Divine Predestination

   The Vocation Of Men To Salvation

   On Repentance

   The Church And Its Head

   The Justification Of Man Before God

   Christian Liberty

   The Roman Pontiff, & His Principal Titles

   Alleged Secession Of All Protestant Churches

   On Idolatry

   The Invocation Of Saints

   On Magistracy
     __________________________________________________________________

DEDICATION

   To those most honourable and Prudent Gentlemen, the Burgomaster,
   Aldermen, and Sheriffs, who are the very Worthy Magistrates of the
   Famous City of Leyden, and our most Revered Lords and Patrons.

   Most Prudent and honourable Gentlemen,

   It is now eight years since our reverend father, who lately died in the
   Lord, was, by your authority and command, and by that of the most noble
   the Curators, summoned to this illustrious University, from the very
   flourishing Church of Amsterdam, to which he had devoted his pastoral
   labours for fifteen years, and was called to fill the vacant situation
   of Doctor Francis Junius, of pious memory, who was then recently
   deceased. We, his nine orphan children, the three youngest of whom have
   been born in this city, removed here at the same time with our mother,
   who is at present plunged in the deepest affliction. From that period
   our ever-to-be honoured father had no higher object than that of
   bestowing the whole of his time, industry and endeavours, in promoting
   the interests of your University, and in strictly discharging his
   functions with as much fidelity as accorded with his abilities and his
   duty. We call upon your honours as competent witnesses to this, our
   testimony, respecting his fidelity and diligence, because he exercised
   these virtues under your immediate inspection, for the space of six
   years; and the truth of our declaration can be no secret to those
   persons who, while he was in the act of performing his duty to the
   University, were themselves either not far from the scene of action, or
   openly beheld and admired his daily and unwearied labours in public and
   private. With regard to his uncommon industry and accurate skill in
   communicating instruction, which gifts had been bestowed on him by
   Almighty God, in his ineffable liberality, independently of any merits
   either on his part or on ours, you always approved of these qualities
   by your honourable suffrages, and, on all occasions when you considered
   it either necessary or expedient, you extolled his genius. You also
   exhibited to him the most indubitable and lucid expressions not only of
   your very laudable opinion of his talents, but likewise of your
   consequent intimate affections for him, during the whole period in
   which he devoted his labours to your honourable service. So that he
   scarcely ever felt a desire for any thing which he did not obtain.

   But the best testimony to this character of our father is that given to
   him, by those persons who either assiduously attended his daily
   lectures in immense numbers, and several of whom are now performing
   most important services to the Churches; or by those who resorted,
   often from places at a great distance, to hear his disputations, and
   all of whom admired and abundantly eulogized his acute and penetrating
   genius, but especially his incredible acquaintance with the Holy
   Scriptures, on which alone he was almost constantly meditating, and to
   the study of which he had devoted the choicest years of his life. These
   persons were also continually and pertinaciously importunate that the
   Theses which had been proposed for disputation under him, and which had
   been written out and placed in order by himself, should be published
   without the least delay, and brought forth to the light of men, for the
   benefit of the public, and especially of those who were far removed
   from Leyden. To their pressing solicitations, after much reluctance on
   the part of our father, he was at length induced to yield; and he put
   to press and published those Theses which were extant in his class of
   Public Disputations, and which, after being written out by himself in
   so many words, had been appointed, and soon afterwards disputed and
   discussed under him [as Moderator.] That collection is now republished,
   with the sole addition of one Thesis on Repentance.

   But, that we may make the studies and labours of our most excellent
   father still better known to you than they are, most honourable and
   prudent gentlemen, and to foreigners, as well to those whose residence
   is nearer to us, we now publish those Theses likewise which he proposed
   for disputation in his own house, at moments of leisure and on
   extraordinary occasions; for he had devoted himself entirely to the
   promotion of the welfare of the students. They were proposed as
   subjects in the last class of his Private Disputations, and were also
   written out and composed by himself, at the very earnest intreaty of
   those youthful scholars. Indeed, we publish these Theses in preference
   to any others; for having already served the purposes of his private
   disputations, they may now afford abundant testimony to the fidelity
   and diligence of our father in instructing and adorning the candidates
   for holy orders. Beside the matter or subject on which he treated with
   so much faithfulness and accuracy, our excellent father, who was a
   severe judge of method, thought that he would exhibit the order which
   ought to be observed in compiling a correct system of Theology. Such a
   plan he had often and long revolved in his mind; and for this purpose
   had perused, with very great care, almost all the Synopses or large
   Treatises of Divinity that had been published. He was in some measure
   induced to give a representation of this scheme in the following Theses
   proposed for private disputation. Let the learned decide upon the skill
   with which he has sketched this outline, which it was his wish to
   display as an attempt at a Synopsis, for the sake of exercise. O, that
   it had been the will of Almighty God, to have enabled him to finish, as
   he had desired, this body of Theological Theses which he was forced to
   leave incomplete. For it is believed, that upwards of twenty Theses are
   still wanting to crown the undertaking. By an untimely death, which is
   a source of the deepest affliction to us, as well as to all good men,
   his design was frustrated; though the consummation of it would, beyond
   any thing else in this life, have been an object of the fondest
   gratification to us, his sorrowing offspring.

   But since it has been the pleasure of our gracious God, against whom it
   does not become us frowardly to contend, to call our father from this
   miserable valley of tears to his own celestial mansion; we wish that he
   had obtained [among survivors] some equitable and candid judges of his
   labourious exertions and innocency; and that it had been possible for
   him, even by death, to escape from the rancorous teeth of calumny,
   which, in conformity to the precept and the example of Jesus Christ our
   only saviour, he endured, as long as his life was spared, without any
   attempt to render railing for railing, yet with such consummate
   patience, as almost excited the indignation of his friends against him.
   We wish also that a certain person had not expressed doubts respecting
   the eternal salvation of our father, whom we with many others openly
   beheld, (as we here do testify,) in a manner the most placid,
   surrendering up his soul to God, like one that was falling asleep,
   amidst unceasing and most ardent prayers, and confessing his own
   wretchedness and weakness, but at the same time extolling that only
   saving grace which shines forth upon those who believe in Jesus Christ,
   the Author of our salvation. We repeat our wishes, that there had not
   been a person who uttered serious doubts about the eternal salvation of
   our father. Far be it from any of us to condemn him whom God has
   absolved, and for whom Jesus Christ testifies, that he came into the
   world, and suffered death.

   Alas! were we not already sufficiently unhappy in having lost one of
   our parents, while we are all of an age comparatively tender, the
   eldest of us not being yet quite seventeen years old! But may our God
   forbid, that they who deliver their souls into his merciful hands in
   the name of Jesus Christ alone, should not be made partakers of eternal
   salvation, or should be disappointed of their hopes of a life of
   blessedness! May he rather grant unto all of us, that, faithfully and
   constantly treading in the footsteps of our beloved father, and being
   active in the pursuit of truth and piety, with integrity and sincerity
   of mind, we may approve our lives and all our studies to God and to all
   good men, as highly as our revered parent, we humbly hope, approved
   himself and all his concerns to your mightinesses, as long as he lived.
   Of the great esteem in which you held him, you have afforded abundant
   proofs, in those innumerable and never sufficiently to-be- recounted
   benefits which he received from you while he lived. But stronger
   evidence of this you gave immediately after his decease, in the
   benefits which you have bestowed on our dearest mother, and on each of
   us their children, and which you most liberally continue to this day.
   O, that the time may at length arrive in which we may be enabled to
   requite you for these, your numberless acts of kindness to us. May God
   assist us thus to repay you.

   But, in the mean time, that some token of a grateful mind towards your
   mightinesses may be extant on our part, at the earliest opportunity we
   bring forth from the library of our deceased parent, under the auspices
   of your honourable names, this rich and costly casket; and we will
   afterwards draw out of the same treasury, each in its due order and
   time, not a few other things of the same, or of a different kind which
   he has left in our possession, provided those which we now offer shall
   meet with a suitable reception from the students of Theology. But we
   are deeply conscious, that this offering of ours is contemptible, when
   placed in competition with your kindness towards us. Of all persons we
   should be the most ungrateful, if we did not make this acknowledgment;
   and still more so, if we did not confess that this is a present from
   our deceased parent, rather than from us. Should it hereafter be seen,
   that our revered father has bequeathed to us, as his heirs, his
   industry, piety and virtue, (which may God of his infinite mercy
   grant,) as he has already made us the inheritors of this production and
   of the other fruits of his studies; we will use our utmost endeavours
   never to be found deficient in our duty, but to propose to ourselves
   throughout the whole of our future lives, by all the means in our
   power, to gain the approbation of your mightinesses, and to prove
   ourselves always grateful to you.

   May Almighty God long preserve you in safety, and render you still
   propitious to us. May he in the most bountiful manner crown your
   government with every blessing from above! So pray Your mightinesses'
   most devoted servants, the seven sons of James Arminius, a native of
   Oudewater, in our own names, and in the names of our two sisters,
   HERMAN, PETER, JOHN, LAURENCE, ARMINUS, JAMES, WILLIAM, DANIEL.
     __________________________________________________________________

  DISPUTATION 1

  ON THE AUTHORITY AND CERTAINTY OF THE SACRED SCRIPTURES

  RESPONDENT: BERNARD VESUKIUS

   I. The authority of Scripture is nothing else but the worthiness
   according to which it merits (1.) CREDENCE, as being true in words and
   true in significations, whether it simply declares anything; or also
   promises and threatens; and (2.) as a superior, it merits OBEDIENCE
   through the credence given to it, when it either commands or prohibits
   anything. Concerning this authority two questions arise, (i.) Whence
   does it belong to Scripture? (ii.) Whence is it evident, or can be
   rendered evident to men, that this authority appertains to Scripture?
   These two questions shall be discussed in their proper order. (1 Tim.
   i. 15; 2 Pet. i. 19; John v. 39; Heb. vi. 18. Rom. i. 5; 2 Cor. x. 5,
   6; xiii, 3; xii, 12; Gal. i. 1, 12, 13, &c.)

   II. The authority of any word or writing whatsoever depends upon its
   author, as the word "authority" indicates; and it is just as great as
   the veracity and the power, that is, the auqenti&lt;a of the author.
   But God is of infallible veracity, and is neither capable of deceiving
   nor of being deceived; and of irrefragable power, that is, supreme over
   the creatures. If, therefore, He is the Author of Scripture, its
   authority is totally dependent on Him alone. (i.) Totally, because He
   is the all sufficient Author, all-true and all-powerful. (ii.) On Him
   alone, because He has no associate either in the truth of what he says,
   or in the power of his right. For all veracity and power in the
   creature proceed from him; and into his veracity and power are resolved
   all faith and obedience, as into the First Cause and the Ultimate
   Boundary. (Gal.. iii, 8, 9; 1 John v. 9; Rom. iii. 4; Tit. i. 2; Psalm
   i. 1-23; Gal. i. 1, 7, 8; John v. 34, 36; Rom. xi. 34-36; xiii, 1.)

   III. This is proved by many arguments dispersed throughout the
   Scripture. (1.) From the inscriptions of most of the prophetical books
   and of the apostolical epistles, which run thus, "The word of the Lord
   that came to Hosea, to Joe], to Amos," &c. "Paul, Peter, James, &c., a
   servant of God and an apostle of Jesus Christ." (Hosea, Joel, Amos;
   Rom. i. 1; James i. 1; 1 Pet. i. 1.) (2.) From the introductions to
   many of the prophecies: "Thus saith the Lord," "That which I have
   received of the Lord, I have also delivered unto you." (Exod. v. 1; 1
   Cor. xi. 23.) (3.) From the petitions, on the part of the ambassadors
   of God and of Christ, for Divine assistance, and from the promise of it
   which is given by God and Christ, such aid being necessary and
   sufficient to obtain authority for what was to be spoken. (Exod. iv. 1;
   Acts iv. 29, 30; Mark xvi. 17, 20.) (4.) From the method used by God
   himself, who, when about to deliver his law, introduced it thus: "I am
   the Lord thy God!" And who, when in the act of establishing the
   authority of his Son, said, "This is my beloved Son, hear ye Him."
   (Exod. xx. 1; Matt. xvii. 5.) This is acknowledged by the general
   consent of mankind. Minos, Numa, Lycurgus and Solon, were fully aware
   of it; for, to give some validity to their laws, they referred them to
   Gods or Goddesses, as the real authors.

   IV. When this authority is once known, it binds the consciences of all
   those to whom the discourse or the writing is addressed or directed, to
   accept of it in a becoming manner. But whoever they be that receive it
   as if delivered by God, that approve of it, publish, preach, interpret
   and expound it, that also distinguish and discriminate it from words or
   writings which are supposititious and adulterated; these persons add
   not a tittle of authority to the sayings or writings, because their
   entire authority, whether contemplated separately or conjointly, is
   only that of mortal men; and things Divine neither need confirmation,
   nor indeed can receive it, from those which are human. But this whole
   employment of approving, preaching, explaining and discriminating, even
   when it is discharged by the Church Universal, is only an attestation
   by which she declares, that she holds and acknowledges these words or
   writings, and these alone, as Divine. (John xv. 22, 24; viii, 24; Gal.
   i. 8, 9; Ephes. ii. 20; Rev. xxi. 14; John i. 6, 7; v, 33-36; 1 Thess.
   ii. 13.)

   V. Therefore, not only false, but likewise implying a contradiction,
   foolish and blasphemous, are such expressions as the following,
   employed by Popish writers: "The Church is of greater antiquity than
   the Scriptures; and they are not authentic except by the authority of
   the Church." (ECCL Enchir. de Ecclesiastes) "All the authority which is
   now given to the Scriptures, is necessarily dependent on that of the
   Church." (PIGHIUS de Hierar. Eecles. lib. 2, c. 2.) "The Scriptures
   would possess no more validity than the Fables of Aesop, or any other
   kind of writing whatever, unless we believed the testimony of the
   Church." (HOSIUS de Author. Script. lib. 3.) But that "the Church is of
   greater antiquity than the Scriptures," is an argument which labours
   under a falsity in the antecedent and under a defective inference. For
   the Scriptures, both with regard to their significations and their
   expressions, are more ancient than the Church; and this former Church
   is bound to receive the latter sayings and writings of Isaiah,
   Jeremiah, &c., of Paul, Peter, &c., as soon as their Divine verity has
   been demonstrated by sufficient arguments according to the judgment of
   God. (Matt. xvi. 18; 1 Cor. iii. 9, 10.)

   VI. But by the very arguments by which the Scriptures are Divine, they
   are also [proved to be] Canonical, from the method and end of their
   composition, as containing the rule of our faith, charity, hope, and of
   the whole of our living. For they are given for doctrine, for reproof,
   for instruction, for correction, and for consolation; that is, that
   they may be the rule of truth and falsehood to our understanding, of
   good and evil to our affections, either to do and to omit, or to have
   and to want. (Deut. xxvii. 26; Psalm cxix. 105,106; Rom. x. 8, 17;
   Matt. xxii. 37-40; 2 Tim. iii. 16; Rom. xv. 4.) For as they are Divine
   because given by God, not because they are "received from men;" so they
   are canonical, and are so called in an active sense, because they
   prescribe a Canon or rule, and not passively, because they are reckoned
   for a Canon, or because they are taken into the Canon. So far indeed is
   the Church from rendering them authentic or canonical, that no
   assemblage or congregation of men can come under the name of a Church,
   unless they account the Scriptures authentic and canonical with regard
   to the sum or substance of the Law and Gospel. (Gal. vi. 16; 1 Tim. vi.
   3, 4; Rom. xvi. 17; x, 8-10, 14-17.)

   VII. The Second Question is, How can a persuasion be wrought in men,
   that these Scriptures are Divine? For the application of this question
   some things must be premised, which may free the discussion from
   equivocations, and may render it more easy. (1.) A distinction must be
   drawn between Scripture, (which, as a sign, consists of a word and of
   the writing of that word,) and the sense or meaning of Scripture;
   because it is not equally important which of the two is necessary to be
   known and believed, since it is Scripture on account of its meanings,
   and because there is a difference in the method of proof by which
   Divinity is ascribed to the writing itself and to its significations.
   (2.) A distinction must likewise be drawn between the primary cause of
   Scripture, and the instrumental causes; lest it be thought, that the
   same necessity exists for believing some book of Scripture to have been
   written by this or that particular amanuensis, as there is for
   believing it to have proceeded from God. (3.) The ratio of those
   meanings is dissimilar, since some of them are simply necessary to
   salvation, as containing the foundation and sum of religion; while
   others are connected with the former in no other way, than by a certain
   relation of explanation, proof, and amplification. (John viii. 24; v,
   39, 46, 36; 1 Cor. xii. 3. 2 Corinthians ii. 4, 5; iii, 7-9; Matt. x.
   20; 2 Cor. iii. 11, 12; Phil. iii. 15, 16; Col. ii. 16, 19.)

   VIII. (4.) The persuasion of faith must be distinguished from the
   certainty of vision, lest a man, instead of seeking here for faith
   which is sufficiently powerful to prevail against temptations, should
   require certainty which is obnoxious to no temptation. (5.) A
   difference must be made between implicit faith by which this Scripture
   without any understanding of its significations is believed to be
   Divine, and explicit faith which consists of some knowledge of the
   meanings, particularly of those which are necessary. And this
   historical knowledge, which has only asfaleian mental security, [or
   human certainty, Luke i. 4,] comes to be distinguished from saving
   knowledge, which also contains wlhroforian full assurance and
   wepoiqhsin confidence, on which the conscience reposes. This
   distinction must be made, that a correct judgment may be formed of
   those arguments which are necessary and sufficient for producing each
   of these kinds of faith. (6.) A difference must also be made between
   those arguments which are worthy of God, and those which human vanity
   may require. And such arguments must not here be demanded as cannot
   fail to persuade every one; since many persons denied all credence to
   Christ himself, though he bore testimony to his own doctrine by so many
   signs and wonders, virtues and distributions of the Holy Ghost. (7.)
   The external light, derived from arguments which are employed to effect
   suasion, must be distinguished from the internal light of the Holy
   Spirit bearing his own testimony; lest that which properly belongs to
   the latter, as the seal and the earnest or pledge of our faith, should
   be ascribed to the strength of arguments and to the veracity of
   external testimonies. (1 Cor. xiii. 9, 12; Gen. xv. 6, 8, with Rom. iv.
   19-21; Judges vi. 36- 39; Heb. xi. 32, 33; John iii. 2, 10; James ii.
   19; John v. 32-36; Matt. xiii. 2; Heb. vi. 11; x, 22; Ephes. iii. 12;
   Matt. xii. 38, 39; xvi, 1; Luke xvi. 30, 31; Matt. xxvii. 42; John xii.
   37; Luke xxiv. 27, 44, 45; 2 Cor. i. 22; Ephes. i. 13, 14; John iv.
   42.)

   IX. (8.) A distinction must be drawn between (i.) those who heard God
   or Christ speaking to them Himself, or addressing them through angels,
   prophets, or apostles, and who first received the sacred books; and
   (ii.) those who, as their successors, have the Scriptures through their
   delivery. (Judges ii. 7, 10; Heb. ii. 3; John xx. 29.) For the former
   of these classes, miracles and the actual fulfillment of predictions,
   which occurred under their own observations, were capable of imparting
   credibility to the words and writing. But to the latter class, the
   narration, both of the doctrine, and of the arguments employed for its
   confirmation, is proposed in the Scriptures, and must be strengthened
   by its own arguments. (Isa. xliv. 7, 8; 1 Cor. xiv, XXII. ) (9.)

   A distinction may indeed be made between the truth of Scripture and its
   Divinity, that progress may be gradually made through a belief of the
   former to a belief in the latter. But these two can never be disparted;
   because, if the Scriptures be true, they are of necessity Divine. (John
   iv. 39- 42; 1 Pet. i. 21.) (10.) Lastly. We must here reflect, that the
   secret things of God, and the doctrine of Christ in reference to its
   being from God, are revealed to little children, to the humble, to
   those who fear God, and to those who are desirous to do the will of the
   Father; (Matt. xi. 25; James iv. 6; Psalm xxv. 14; John vii. 17; 1 Cor.
   i. 20, 27;) and that, on the contrary, to the wise men of the world, to
   the proud, to those who reject the counsel of God against themselves
   and judge themselves unworthy of everlasting life, to foolish and
   perverse men, and to those who resist the Holy Ghost, the mystery of
   God and the Gospel of Christ are hidden and continue unrevealed; nay,
   to such persons they are a stumbling-block and foolishness, while they
   are in themselves the power and the wisdom of God. (Luke vii. 30; Acts
   xiii. 46; vii, 51; 2 Cor. iv. 3, 4; 1 Cor. i. 23, 24.)

   X. These remarks being premised, let us see how we are or can be
   persuaded into a belief that the Scriptures of the Old and of the New
   Testament are Divine, at least with regard to their essentials, that
   is, the sum or substance of the Law and Gospel, without faith in which,
   salvation can have no existence. Three things principally serve to
   produce this persuasion. (i.) The external testimony of men. (ii.) The
   arguments contained in the Scriptures themselves. (iii.) And the
   internal witness of God. The first of these, by procuring, after the
   manner of men, esteem and reverence to the Scriptures, prepares [or
   makes a way for] faith which is resolved into the two latter that are
   truly Divine, and, through them, is fully completed.

   XI. 1. In adverting to human testimony, we shall omit all enemies, also
   the Mahometans who have embraced the dregs of a religion which is
   compounded of a corruption of Judaism, Christianity and Paganism. But
   the testimony of those who acknowledge the Scriptures is twofold. That
   of the Jews, who testify concerning the doctrine and the books of the
   Old Testament; and that of Christians who bear witness to those of the
   whole body of Scripture. (1.) Two circumstances add strength to the
   testimony of the Jews. (i.) The constancy of their profession in the
   very depths of misery, when, by the mere denial of it, they might be
   made partakers of liberty and of worldly possessions. (ii.) Their
   hatred of the Christian religion, which transcribes its own origin,
   increase, and establishment from a good part of the Scriptures of the
   Old Testament, and with so much confidence as to be prepared to stand
   and fall by their evidence and judgment alone. (Acts xxvi. 22; 9, 2
   Pet. i. 19, 20; Acts xvii. 11.) (2.) The testimony of Christians.
   distinguished by the same mark of constancy, (Rev. vi. 9; xii, 11,) we
   will consider in three particulars: (i.) That of the Church Universal,
   which, from her own foundation to the present age, having professed the
   Christian as a Divine religion, testifies that her religion is
   contained in these books, and that they have proceeded from God. (ii.)
   That of each of the primitive Churches, which, being founded by the
   apostles, first received not only the whole of the Old Testament, but
   likewise the Epistles which were addressed either to them, to their
   pastors, or at least to men who were well known, and who delivered them
   by the same title to their successors and to other Churches. (Col. iv.
   16.) (iii.) That of the Representative Church, as it is called,
   consisting of pastors and teachers, who, possessing skill in languages
   and in Divine things, pronounce their judgment after having instituted
   an examination, and confirm it [by arguments] to the flocks that are
   severally committed to their care. (Ephes. iv. 27.) On reviewing these
   diviunes, we place the Roman Pontiff below the lowest parochial priest
   in the Romish Church who may be more learned than his holiness.

   XII. 2. The arguments contained in the Scripture are four, and those of
   the utmost importance. The quality of its doctrines, the majesty of its
   style, the agreement of its parts, and the efficacy of its doctrine.
   Each of these, separately considered, possesses much influence; but,
   when viewed conjointly, they are capable of inducing every one to give
   credit to them, if he is not blinded by a spirit of obstinacy, and by
   an opinion preconceived through inveterate habits. The Quality of the
   Doctrine is proved to be Divine. (1.) By the precepts delivered in
   these books, which exhibit three marks of Divinity. (i.) The high
   excellence of the actions prescribed, in self-denial, and in the
   regulation of the whole life according to godliness. (Matt. xvi. 24,
   25; Rom. viii. 12, 13.) (ii.) The wonderful uncommonness of some
   actions, which amount to folly in the estimation of the natural man;
   and yet they are prescribed with a fearless confidence. Such as,
   "Unless thou believest on Jesus, who is crucified and dead, thou shalt
   be condemned; if thou wilt believe on him, thou shalt be saved." (1
   Cor. i. 18, 24; ii, 2, 14; John viii. 24; Rom. x. 9.) (iii.) The manner
   in which they are required to be performed, that they be done from
   conscience and charity; if otherwise, they will be adjudged as
   hypocritical. (Deut. vi. 5; 1 Cor. xiii. 1; James iv. 12; Rom. viii. 5;
   1 Pet. ii. 19.) In the first of these three is perceived a sanctity, in
   the second an omnipotence, and in the third an omniscience, each of
   which is purely Divine. (2.) By the promises and threatenings, which
   afford two tokens of Divine worth or validity. (i.) The manifest
   evidence, that they could have been delivered by no one except by God.
   (ii.) Their excellent accommodation, which is such that these promises
   and threatenings cannot possibly prove influential upon the conscience
   of any man, except upon his who considers the precepts, to which they
   are subjoined, to be Divine. (3.) The admirable attempering of the
   justice of God by which he loves righteousness and hates iniquity, and
   of his equity by which he administers all things, with his mercy in
   Christ our propitiation. In this, the glory of God shines forth with
   transcendent luster. (Rom. v. 15.) Three particulars in it are worthy
   of notice. (i.) That, except through the intervention of a reconciler
   and mediator, God would not receive into favour the sinner, through
   love for whom as his own creature he is touched with mercy. (ii.) That
   his own dearly beloved Son, begotten by Himself and discharging an
   office of perfect righteousness, God would not admit as a deprecator
   and intercessor, except when sprinkled with his own blood. (2 Cor. v.
   19; Ephes. ii. 12, 16; Heb. viii. 5, 6; ix, 7, 11, 12.) (iii.) That he
   constituted Christ as a saviour only to those who repent and believe,
   having excluded the impenitent from all hope of pardon and salvation.
   (Heb. iii. 8, 19; v, 8, 9; Luke xxiv. 26; Rom. viii. 29.) (4.) A most
   signal and decisive proof, which serves to demonstrate the necessity
   and sufficiency of this doctrine, exists in this fact, that Jesus
   himself did not enter into his glory except through obedience and
   sufferings, that this was done for believers alone who were to be
   conformed to him, (Heb. x. 21, 22; iv, 14-16; John xvii. 2, 8,) and
   that, on being received into Heaven, He was constituted Governor over
   the house of God, the King of his people, and the dispenser of life
   eternal.

   XIII. The Majesty of Their Style is proved. (1.) By the attributes
   which the Author of the Scriptures claims for himself; the transcendent
   elevation of his nature, in his omniscience and omnipotence; (Isa.
   xliv. 7, 8; xli, 12, 25, 26; Psalm i. 1,) the excellence of his
   operations, which they claim for Him as the Creator and Governor of all
   things; the preeminence of power, which they claim for Him as the King
   of kings and Lord of lords. (2.) By the absence of all "respect of
   persons" which is not under the influence of favour and hatred, of hope
   and fear, and by which God declares himself to be the same towards all
   men, whatever station they may occupy, uttering his commands and
   prohibitions, his promises and threatenings, to monarchs, (Deut. xviii.
   15, 16; 1 Sam. xii. 25,) as well as to the meanest among the people, to
   whole nations and to single individuals, and even to the rulers of
   darkness, the princes of this world, Satan and his angels, and thus to
   the whole universe of his creatures. (3.) By the method which he
   employs in making a law and in giving it his sanction. It has no other
   introduction than, "I Jehovah am thy God;" no other conclusion than, "I
   Jehovah have spoken." "Be strong, for I am with thee; fear not, for I
   will deliver thee." Either He who speaks, truly claims these attributes
   for himself, and so his discourse is Divine, (Exod. xx. 2; Josh. i. 9;
   Isa. xliii. 5; Jer. i. 8; Deut. iv. 5,) or (let no blasphemy adhere to
   the expression,) it is of all foolish speeches the most foolish.
   Between these two extremes no medium exists. But in the whole of the
   Scriptures not a single tittle occurs, which will not remove from them
   by an invincible argument the charge of folly.

   XIV. The Agreement Between Each And Every Part of The Scriptures, prove
   with sufficient evidence, their Divinity, because such an agreement of
   its several parts can be ascribed to nothing less than the Divine
   Spirit. It will be useful for the confirmation of this matter to
   consider (1.) The immense space of time which was occupied in the
   inditing of it, from the age of Moses, down to that of St. John, to
   whom was vouchsafed the last authentic revelation. (Mal. iv. 4; Jer.
   xxviii. 8; John v. 46.) (2.) The multitude of writers or amanuenses,
   and of books. (3.) The great distance of the places in which the books
   were severally written, that tendered it impossible for the authors to
   confer together. (4.) Lastly and principally, the institution of a
   comparison between the doctrine of Moses and that of the latter
   Prophets, as well as between that of the Old and that of the New
   Testament. The predictions of Moses alone concerning the Messiah, the
   calling of the Gentiles, and the rejection of the Jews, when compared
   with the interpretations and with the addition of particular
   circumstances which are found in the Prophets and the Psalms, will
   prove that the perfect agreement which exists between the various
   writers is Divine. (Gen. xlix. 10; Deut. xxxii. 21; Dan. ix. 25, 26;
   Mal. i. 10, 11; Psalm 2, 22, 110 132; Matt. 1, 2, 24, 27; Luke i. 55,
   70; xxiv, 27, 44.) To the Divinity of the agreement between the
   writings of the Old Testament and those of the New, abundant testimony
   will be afforded even solely by that sudden, unexpected and
   miraculously consentaneous accommodation and befitting aptitude of all
   the predictions respecting the Messiah, the gathering of the Gentiles
   to Him, the unbelief and rejection of the Jews, and lastly concerning
   the abrogation which was to be made of the ceremonial law, first by its
   being fulfilled, and afterwards by its forcible removal. Whether these
   predictions were foretold in words, or foreshown by types of things,
   persons, facts and events; their accommodation to the person, the
   advent, the state, the offices, and the times of Jesus of Nazareth, was
   consentaneous even to a miracle. (Psalm cxviii. 22, 23; Matt. xxi. 42;
   Isa. lxv. 1; Acts xi. 18; Psalm xl. 7, 8; Dan. ix. 25, 26.) If the Old
   Testament alone, or only the New, were now extant, some doubts might be
   indulged concerning the Divinity of each. But their agreement together
   excludes all doubt respecting their Divinity, when both of them are
   thus completely in accordance, since it is impossible for such a
   perfect agreement to have been the fabrication of an angelic or of a
   human mind.

   XV. Lastly, the Divinity of Scripture is powerfully demonstrated by The
   Efficacy of Its Doctrine, which we place in two particulars. In the
   credit or belief which it has obtained in the world, and in the
   destruction of remaining religions and of the entire kingdom of Satan.
   Of this destruction two most signal tokens were afforded, in the
   silencing of the Heathen Oracles, and in the removal of Idols. (1 Tim.
   iii. 15; Zech. xiii. 2; Zeph. ii. 11; Acts xvi. 16, 17.) This efficacy
   is recommended, (1.) By the peculiar genius of the doctrine, which,
   independently of the Divine power which accompanies and assists it, is
   calculated to repel every one from giving his assent to it, on account
   of the apparent absurdity in it, and the concupiscence of human
   passions which is abhorrent to it. For this is the manner in which it
   speaks: "Unless thou dost believe in Jesus the Crucified, and art
   prepared to pour out thy life for him, thou shalt lose thy soul." (Isa.
   liii. 1; 2 Cor. i. 2; 2 Tim. iii. 12.) (2.) By the persons through whom
   the doctrine was administered, and who, in the estimation of men, were
   few in number, mean in condition, and full of infirmities; while in
   God's sight, they were possessed of invincible patience and mildness,
   which were so conspicuous in Him who was the Prince of all, that He
   asked some of his familiar disciples who were offended at his doctrine,
   "Will ye also go away?" (Luke vi. 13; Matt. iv. 18, 19; 2 Cor. 4, xii,
   12; 2 Tim. iv, 2; John 6, 67.) (3.) By the multitude, the wisdom, the
   authority, and the power of the enemies who placed themselves in
   opposition to this doctrine. Also by their love for the religion of
   their own country, and their consequent hatred of this novel doctrine,
   and by the result of both these, in their infuriated and outrageous
   eagerness to extirpate the Christians and their doctrine. It was
   opposed by the Roman empire itself nearly three hundred years, during
   which the rest of the world lent their assistance. This continued
   opposition was excited by the Jews, nay by Satan himself, who had fixed
   his throne in that empire. (1 Cor. ii. 8; Acts iv. 27; ix, 2; Matt. x,
   l 8-22; John xvi. 2; Ephes. vi. 12; Rev. ii. 10, 13.) (4.) By the
   infinite multitude of men of every description, nation, age, sex and
   condition, who have believed this doctrine, and confirmed their belief
   by enduring intolerable torments even unto death. This cannot be
   ascribed, except through an ambitious insanity, either to ambition or
   to fury in such a multitude of persons of various descriptions. (Rev.
   vi. 9-11.) (5.) By the short time in which, like lightning, it pervaded
   a great part of the habitable world; so that Paul alone filled all the
   places between Jerusalem and Illyricum with the Gospel of Christ. (Col.
   i. 6; Rom. xv. 19.)

   XVI. 3. These suasions are of themselves alone sufficient to produce an
   historical faith, but not that which is saving. To them, therefore,
   must be added the internal suasion of God by his Holy Spirit, which has
   its scope of operations, (1.) In the illumination of the mind, that we
   may prove what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God;
   that we may knew the things which are freely given to us of God, and
   that Jesus Christ is the wisdom and the power of God. (1 Cor. iii. 7;
   Ephes. i. 17, 18; Rom. xii. 9; 1 Cor. ii. 12; i, 24; xii, 3.) (2.) In
   inscribing the laws of God upon our hearts, which consists of the
   infusion of a desire and of strength for their performance. (Heb. viii.
   10.) (3.) In sealing the promises of God on our hearts; under which
   term, that by which we are sealed to the day of redemption is called a
   seal, and an earnest. (2 Cor. i. 22; Ephes. i. 13,14.) In this manner
   he who inspired the sacred Scriptures into holy men of God, who
   constituted in the Church, Bishops, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists,
   Pastors and Teachers, who put the word of reconciliation into their
   mouths, is the Author of that faith by which this doctrine is
   apprehended unto righteousness and eternal salvation. (Acts xx. 28;
   Ephes. iv. 11; 2 Cor. v. 19; Rom. viii. 16.) Since his testimony is
   distinct from that of a man's own spirit, and since it is said to be
   concerning those things which are necessary to salvation, and not
   concerning words, letters, or writing, the Papists act most perversely
   in confounding these testimonies, and in requiring through the witness
   of the Spirit [of God] the distinction between an apocryphal verse, and
   one that is canonical, though the former may in reality agree with the
   canonical Scriptures.

   XVII. But, that we may comprise in few words the force of these three
   proofs, we declare, 1. concerning the force of human testimony which
   ascribes our Scriptures to God, that the author of no composition which
   ever was published or is now extant can be proved with such lucid
   evidence as the author of these Scriptures; and that the importance of
   all other compositions sinks far beneath the dignity of this, not only
   with regard to the multitude, the wisdom and the integrity of the
   witnesses, but likewise with regard to the uninterrupted evenness, the
   constancy and the duration of the testimony. The reason this is, that
   the religion contained in these Scriptures has been preached to immense
   numbers and varieties of people, and for a very long period; which
   circumstance, in itself, contains no small argument of Divinity. For it
   is most equitable, that religion, which alone is truly Divine, and
   which, without any respect of nations, it is God's will that men should
   receive, ought also to be preached generally to all mankind. (Matt.
   xxviii. 19, 20; Mark xvi. 15; Rom. x. 12-18.)

   XVIII. 2. We assert, that the arguments which, contained in the
   Scriptures, prove the Divinity of the religion prescribed in them, are
   so full and perfect, that no arguments can be derived for the defense
   of any religion which are not comprehended in these, and in a more
   excellent degree. (2 Cor. iv. 2- 6.) They are indeed of such high value
   that the truth of the Christian religion is established by them as
   strongly, as it is possible by any other arguments to prove that there
   is any true religion at all, or that a true one is possible. So that to
   a man who is desirous of proving, that there is any religion which is
   true, or that such a religion is possible, no way is more compendious
   and easy than to do so by these arguments, in preference to any other
   which can be deduced from general notions. But the most wonderful of
   all is, that the very thing in the Christian religion which seems to be
   one of the greatest absurdity, affords the most certain proof of its
   Divinity, it being allowed to be a very great truth--that this religion
   has been introduced into the consciences of men by a mild suasion, and
   not by the power of the sword. (1 Cor. i. 29-xxiv, ; 2 Cor. v. 11; Luke
   ix. 54, 55.) Of a similar tendency is the argument formerly used by St.
   Augustine: "If the Christian religion was established by the miracles
   which are related in the Scriptures, it is true; but if it was not, the
   greatest of all miracles is, that it has been able to obtain credit
   without miracles." For the internal suasion of Him who alone can work
   miracles, ought to stand in the place of miracles outwardly performed,
   and to be equally potent. (Rev. ii. 17.) And thus the very narration,
   contained in these books, of the miracles which were performed in the
   early ages in proof of the doctrine, is now, through a most beautiful
   vicissitude of circumstances, proved to be true by the Divinity of the
   doctrine when subjected to examination.

   XIX. Although the inward witness of the Holy Spirit is known to him
   alone to whom it is communicated, yet, since there is a mutual relation
   between the veracity of the Testifier, and the truth of the thing which
   is proved, an examination may be instituted respecting the testimony
   itself. This is so far from being injurious or displeasing to the Holy
   Ghost, that by this method His veracity is rendered in all possible
   directions more eminently conspicuous, as being the Author not only of
   the internal testimony and the external word, but likewise of the
   significations concerning which he bears witness to both; on this
   account also, he has commanded us to "try the spirits whether they be
   of God," and has added a specimen of such a "trying." (1 John iv. 1,
   2.) It will therefore be as easy to confute the man who falsely boasts
   of having the internal testimony of the Holy Spirit, as to be able to
   destroy that religion to which he professes himself to be devoted. From
   this it is apparent, that the inward witness of the Spirit is
   calculated to impart assurance to him to whom it is communicated, but
   not to convince any other person. Wherefore those who reckon this among
   the causes why they account the Scriptures Divine, are foolishly said
   by the Papists to beg the question, since they never employ it
   themselves in convincing others.

     __________________________________________________________________

  DISPUTATION 2

  ON THE SUFFICIENCY AND PERFECTION OF THE HOLY SCRIPTURES IN

  OPPOSITION TO TRADITIONS RESPONDENT: ABRAHAM VLIET

   I. When we ascribe Perfection to the Scriptures of the Old and New
   Testament, we do not mean by that word, the perfection described by the
   Apostle in 1 Corinthians xiii. 10; for the latter is peculiar to the
   life to come, in which "God will be all in all." (1 Cor. xv. 28.)
   Neither do we understand by it a certain absolute quality which is
   equally dispersed through the whole body of Scripture and each of its
   parts, and which cannot be withdrawn from the Scriptures by any man who
   confesses that they have proceeded from God, their most perfect Author.
   (Psalm xix. 7-9; Rom. vii. 12.) Nor do we mean such a perfection as may
   embrace all things generally and severally, of what description soever
   they are, which have at any time been inspired into "holy men," and
   published by them to the Church. (2 Tim. iii. 16, 17.) But by this
   expression we understand a relative Perfection, which, for the sake of
   a particular purpose, agrees with the Scriptures as with an instrument,
   and according to which they perfectly comprehend all things that have
   been, are now, or ever will be necessary for the salvation of the
   Church.

   II. We are compelled, both by the truth of the thing itself, of which
   we shall hereafter treat, and by a kind of necessity, to establish this
   perfection of Scripture: because, without this, we shall be forced, for
   the sake of obtaining entire salvation, to have recourse to other
   revelations of God, already made, or afterwards to be communicated; but
   our attempt will prove abortive, unless the Divinity of these
   additional revelations be established by indubitable arguments. Those
   [new] revelations which are said to have been already made, have never
   yet been demonstrated in this manner; and it will be impossible to
   produce any such demonstrative evidence in support of those which, it
   is asserted, will afterwards occur.

   III. But, that we may be able to establish this perfection of Scripture
   in a solid manner, and as if from the very foundation, we will take a
   brief view of the perfection of Divine revelations in general. For, by
   this means, we shall not only remove the error of those who entertain a
   different opinion, but shall also expose and shut up the source from
   which it is derived. We now use the expression, "Divine revelation,"
   for the act of reveling, not for what is revealed; and we say, Divine
   revelation is internal, which, with the Scriptures themselves, we
   distinguish by the general term, "inspiration;" and that it is external
   by means of the enunciation or the inditing of the words spoken or
   revealed. Perfection, therefore, is withdrawn from the Scriptures,
   either in these revelations, or in those which preceded them, in the
   subjoined order and method.

   IV. (1.) The perfect inspiration given to the prophets and apostles,
   who are the administrators of the Scriptures, is denied; and the
   necessity and frequent occurrence of new revelations after those holy
   men, are openly asserted. (2.) Even when this perfection is conceded,
   the possibility is denied of making a perfect enunciation of the
   inspired signification or sense by means of the outward word. The
   reason assigned is, that the ratio of those Divine meanings which are
   necessary to be known for the perfect consummation of our salvation, is
   diverse. For while some of them serve for the instruction of the
   ignorant and of babes in Christ, and for preparing their minds; others
   are useful for perfecting adults, and for imbuing and filling their
   minds with the plenary wisdom of the Spirit; and while the former class
   of Divine meanings [for the ignorant, &c.] may be made manifest and
   taught by the external word, the latter class can be offered to the
   minds [of adults,] and impressed upon them, only by the internal
   address of the Spirit. (3.) When the perfect inspiration and
   enunciation of all the divine meanings have been granted, it is denied
   that the Scriptures perfectly contain whatever has been inspired and
   declared that is necessary to salvation; because, as it is alleged, it
   was not the intention of the Spirit who inspired them, or of his
   amanuensis, to consign all those necessary things in writing to
   posterity.

   V. Since these three negatives hold the following order and relation
   among themselves, when the first two, or when either of them is
   established, the third may likewise be granted, and when the third is
   destroyed, its predecessors may be removed, having effected the
   destruction of the third, we might seem to have given complete
   satisfaction, if we had not thought proper, according to our promise,
   to remove the causes of the error, and thus to cut off from the
   adversaries all occasion for complaining, that we had treated the
   controversy not according to its nature, but for the convenience of our
   own design and for the sake of Victoria. Wherefore to these three
   negatives we oppose affirmatively the following three most veritable
   enunciations: (1.) All things which have been, are now, or till the
   consummation of all things, will be necessary to be known for the
   salvation of the Church, have been perfectly inspired and revealed to
   the prophets and apostles. (2.) All things thus necessary have been
   administered and declared by the prophets and apostles, according to
   this inspiration, by the outward word, to the people who have been
   committed to them. (3.) All things thus necessary are fully and
   perfectly comprehended in their books.

   VI. From this deduction it is apparent, that the acts of revelation are
   distinguished from the significations revealed, and yet that the
   matters or subjects and the significations agree with the different
   acts of revelation. This distinction meets the objection of the
   Mystics, who insist that the internal illumination of the Holy Spirit
   is always necessary. This we concede with respect to the act of
   revelation, but not with respect to the subjects and new
   significations. The agreement between the subjects and meanings, and
   the acts of revelation, refutes the Papists, who affirm, that the
   Church was before the Scripture, because the inditing of the word which
   had been previously pronounced, was posterior to the Church." This,
   however, is not a necessary consequence, if the same meanings be
   comprehended in the written word and in that which was pronounced.

   VII. (1.) Commencing therefore with the proof of the first of our three
   affirmative propositions, ( 5,) and, for the sake of brevity, laying
   aside the perfection of the revelation made under the Old Testament, we
   will proceed to shew, that all things necessary in the manner which we
   have described have been inspired into the apostles, and that no new
   inspiration has since their times been communicated, and that it will
   not be in the future. We prove this in the following manner: (1.) By
   express passages of Scripture; (2.) by arguments deduced from them. The
   first passage is, "The Holy Ghost shall teach you all things,
   whatsoever I have said unto you." (John xiv. 26.) From the former part
   of this passage we obtain the whole of our proposition: for he who
   "teaches all things" omits nothing that ought to be taught. The same
   proof is derived from the latter part of it, if it be evident that
   Christ told "all things" to his disciples, which is demonstrated by
   these his own words: "All things which I have heard of my Father, I
   have made known unto you." (John xv. 15.) But he "who is in the bosom
   of the Father," has heard of all things which ought to be revealed.
   "For I have given unto them the words which thou gavest me." (John
   xvii. 8.)

   VIII. The second passage is, "The spirit of truth will guide you into
   all truth." (John xvi. 13.) The efficacy of this teaching will shine
   forth with more splendid evidence, if we suffer ourselves to be
   instructed by Christ in that truth through which, according to his
   prayer, not only the apostles, but likewise the whole Church to the end
   of the world, will be sanctified. (John xvii. 17-20.)

   IX. The third is, "But God will reveal it unto us by his Spirit," (1
   Cor. ii. 10,) that is, the wisdom which is there specified. But that no
   one may suppose this wisdom to be partial and serving the Church only
   for a certain time, let him examine the attributes which are there
   assigned to it. It is the wisdom which God pre-determined from all
   eternity, and foreordained "unto the glory" of the Church Universal,
   for this is meant by the word "our" in the phraseology of the apostles.
   (v. 7.) It is the wisdom which contains "the things that God hath
   prepared for ALL them who love him," and not for them only who lived in
   the apostolic age: (v. 9.) The wisdom which contains "the deep things
   of God," (v. 10,) all those "things that are freely given to us of
   God," as his Church, (v. 12,) and that are called, in another passage,
   (Ephes. iii. 8,) "The unsearchable riches of Christ." It is that wisdom
   which is called "the mind of the Lord, and the knowledge of which is
   said to be the knowledge of the mind of Christ." (1 Cor. ii. 16.) It is
   the wisdom of which "those alone who are perfect and spiritual" are
   said to be capable, (v, 6, 14, 15,) that it might not seem to be
   serviceable only for the preparatory instruction of the more ignorant
   sort, and of babes in Christ." [See  4.] The passages already cited
   may suffice.

   X. From among many others, let the following be received as the
   reasons: The First is taken from the joint consideration of the
   glorification of Christ, and the promise of the Holy Spirit, who was
   bestowed after the glorification of Christ, and who was poured forth by
   Him. (John vii. 38, 39.) The most copious effusion of the Holy Spirit
   was deferred to the time when Christ should be glorified. After his
   glorification, it was necessary, that it should not be any longer
   delayed; for Christ, "being by the right hand of God exalted, and
   having received the promised Holy Spirit," (Acts ii. 33,) and that "not
   by measure," (John iii. 34, 35,) "he shed him forth" in such copious
   abundance, as it was possible for him to be poured out, and to be
   received by mankind. So that the event which had been predicted by the
   prophet Joel (ii, 28,) is said then to have come to pass. (Acts ii. 16,
   17.) This Spirit is the Spirit of the Father and of Christ alone; and
   he will plead the cause of no one except that of Christ, through the
   entire duration of the present life, as his Advocate against the world.
   (John xvi. 7, 8.) "he will not speak of himself" but from Christ; and
   he will "shew us those things which are Christ's, and which He will
   receive from him. He will therefore glorify Christ." (13-15.) From
   these premises it follows, that no new inspiration, after that to the
   apostles, will be necessary to salvation; and that what is said about
   the distinct periods of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit,
   with regard to a revelation, is a pure invention of the human brain. By
   this argument, all new inspirations are refuted, with such soundness
   and so agreeably to the nature of the thing itself, that the doctrine
   which maintains the contrary cannot possibly defend itself without
   inventing another Christ and another Spirit; (which is a notable trait
   in the conduct of the great masters among the Mystics;) or it must at
   least substitute for Christ His vicar on earth, who, invested with
   plenary power, may administer the affairs of the church, as is the
   practice of the Papists.

   XI. The Second reason is taken from the office of the Apostles, for the
   discharge of which, because they were immediately called by Christ
   himself, they were undoubtedly furnished with sufficient gifts, and
   therefore with sufficient knowledge. But they were constituted "able
   ministers of the "New Testament;" (2 Cor. iii. 6,) to which as a
   Testament, nothing can be added; (Gal. iii. 15;) and, as New, it will
   neither "wax old" nor be abrogated; (Heb. viii. 13;) after the
   apostles, therefore, no new inspiration will be given. They were also
   made ministers of the Spirit;" they were therefore instructed by
   inspiration in those meanings which agree with the most perfect
   Christians, and not with those only who are placed under the law and
   "the oldness of the letter." To them was also committed "the
   ministration of righteousness;" but this was the last of all, on
   account of being that which is immediately connected with life eternal,
   and which is likewise administered by righteousness. The apostles are
   also called "reapers," with regard to the prophets who were the
   sowers;" (John iv. 38;) but this last service was to be performed in
   the field of the Lord. After the apostles, therefore, no new
   ministration has been given; and, on this account, no new inspiration.

   XII. The Third reason is drawn from the circumstance of the period at
   which this inspiration was communicated to the apostles, and which may
   be considered in two respects. (1.) It was in the time of the Messiah,
   which is called the last," being truly the last time with regard to a
   revelation. "And it shall come to pass in the last days, I will pour
   out of my Spirit upon all flesh." (Acts ii. 17.) "When the Messiah is
   come, he will tell us all things." (John iv. 25.) "God hath in these
   last days spoken unto us by his Son." (Heb. i. 2.) To the same effect
   Christ is said to have been made, "manifest in these last times." (1
   Pet. i. 20.) (2.) That was "the time appointed of the Father," in which
   "the heir" should be no longer "as a child, under a tutor;" (Gal. iv.
   1-5;) but, having arrived at full age, he might pass his life under the
   grace and guidance of the Holy Spirit; by whom, as "the Spirit of
   liberty," being illuminated, he might "with open face behold as in a
   glass the glory of the Lord, and be transformed into the same image
   from glory to glory." (2 Cor. iii. 17, 18.) After the apostles,
   therefore, no new inspiration, no greater perfection has been granted.

   XIII. The Fourth reason will exhibit to us the glory and duration of
   the doctrine inspired and committed to the apostles. For it greatly
   excels in glory, as being "the gospel of the glory of Christ" (2 Cor.
   iv. 4,) who is the image of God, "the brightness of the glory, and the
   express character of the person, of the Father," (Heb. i. 3.) and "in
   whom it pleased the Father that all fullness should dwell."(Col. i. 19)
   indeed "all the fullness of the Godhead bodily." (ii, 9.) The law was
   not at all glorious, "by reason of this glory which excelled it." (2
   Cor. iii. 10.) From these premises it will follow, by parity of reason,
   that, if the more excellent doctrine shall continue forever, no future
   doctrine "will have any glory by reason of this which excelleth in
   glory." Its duration also excludes all others: for it remains without
   being abolished, (2 Cor. iii. 11,)and will be preached in all the world
   till the end shall come," (Matt. xxiv. 14;) and Christ promises to
   those who administer this doctrine, that he "will be with them always,
   even unto the end of the world." (xxviii, 20.)

   XIV. We will distinctly prove the second proposition [ 5,] thus
   separated into two members. First. Those things which serve for
   perfection, as well as those which serve for preparation, can be and
   really have been declared by Christ and the apostles. Second. The
   apostles perfectly taught all things which are and will be necessary
   for the Church.

   XV. Let the subjoined arguments stand in proof of the First member of
   the proposition. (1.) "The Son who is in the bosom of the Father," that
   is, who is admitted to the intimate knowledge of his secrets, "hath
   declared," by the outward word, "what He hath seen and heard" with the
   Father. (John i. 18; iii, 32.) But it is impious to suppose, that these
   things relate only to preparation. Nay, "the things which the apostles
   saw and heard they have declared," that the Church "might have
   communion with the Father and the Son." But perfection is placed in
   this communion. (1 John i. 3.) The wisdom which the apostles received
   through revelation of the Spirit, who "searcheth the deep things of
   God," has been declared by them "in words which the same Holy Spirit
   teacheth." (1 Cor. ii. 18.) But this wisdom belongs to perfect and
   spiritual men, (1 Cor. ii. 6-15,) as we have already. seen. [ 9.]

   XVI. (3.) The word, through faith in which righteousness and eternal
   life are obtained, is not only preparative but likewise perfective. Of
   this kind is "the word of faith which the apostles preached;" and for
   this reason the gospel is called "the ministration of righteousness,"
   "the word of salvation," and "the power of God unto salvation to every
   one that believeth." (Rom. x. 8-10; 1 Cor. i. 21; 2 Cor. iii. 9; Acts
   xiii. 26; Rom. i. 16.) (4.) The ministration of the Spirit and of the
   New Testament is opposed to that of Moses, which acted the part of a
   school master, yet "made nothing perfect" (Heb. vii. 19,) and to "the
   letter" of death and of the Old Testament. This ministration of the
   Spirit does not serve for preparation, but contains perfection; and
   this is the ministration which the apostles executed, and from which
   they are called ministers of the New Testament and of the Spirit, (2
   Cor. vi. 7,) and are said to present every man perfect in Christ Jesus.
   (Col. i. 8.) (5.) That word which is called "the incorruptible seed, of
   which we are born again, and which endureth forever," (1 Pet. i.
   23-25,) is not merely preparatory. And such is the word which through
   the gospel the apostles have declared.

   XVII. Let the following arguments establish the Second member. (1.) The
   whole counsel of God, which is to be "declared unto men," (Luke vii.
   30,) contains all things necessary to salvation. But Paul declared to
   the Ephesians "all the counsel of God." (Acts xx. 27.) Therefore all
   things necessary to salvation were declared, &c. (2.) The Corinthians
   are saved by the gospel which Paul preached, provided they retain it as
   they received it. (1 Cor. xv. 1, 2.) Therefore, all things necessary to
   salvation were preached to the Corinthians. (3.) "Salvation at the
   first began to be spoken by Christ," and, after having been perfectly
   preached by him, "it was confirmed unto us by the apostles that heard
   him." (Heb. ii. 3.) Therefore the doctrine of the apostles perfectly
   contained all things which the necessary confirmation of the Church
   demanded.

   XVIII. And lest any one should utter this cavil, "The Apostles, we
   allow, taught all the things which were necessary at that time, but not
   all those which are sufficient for the edification of the body of
   Christ to the end of the world," let the following arguments likewise
   be added. (4.) Whoever he be that "preaches any other gospel" than that
   which the apostles preached, and which the apostolic churches received,
   "he is accursed." (Gal. i. 7-9.) Therefore it is not lawful to add
   anything to the gospel preached by the apostles, to the end of the
   world. Indeed, he who makes an addition, "has perverted the gospel of
   Christ." (5.) In Christ Jesus, or "in the mystery of God, and of the
   Father, and of Christ, are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and
   knowledge." (Col. ii. 2 3.) But Jesus Christ and this mystery were
   completely preached by the apostles. (i, 25-28.) "Jesus Christ has been
   made unto us of God, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and
   redemption;" (1 Cor. i. 30, 31;) from which the apostle concludes, that
   true glorying consists in the knowledge of Christ alone. (Jer. ix. 24.)
   Therefore the doctrine taught by the apostles contains whatever will,
   at any time to the end of the world, be necessary, useful and glorious
   to the church. (6.) The Church Universal is "built upon the foundation
   of the apostles and prophets," (Ephes. ii. 20, 21;) and the apostles
   are called "the foundations of the celestial Jerusalem," (Rev. xxi.
   14,) which is the mother of us all." (Gal. iv. 26.) Therefore, the
   apostles have declared all things which will be necessary for the whole
   church to the final consummation. (7.) "There is one body of Christ,
   the fullness of Him that filleth all in all; one Spirit, one hope of
   our calling, one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one bread, one God and
   Father of all, and Jesus Christ the same yesterday, to-day, and
   forever." (Ephes. iv. 4-6; i, 23; 1 Cor. x. 17; Heb. xiii. 8.) But the
   apostles perfectly preached this God, this Lord, this Spirit, this
   faith, hope, baptism and bread, and by their doctrine animate and
   vivify this whole body to the end of the world. (Col. i. 24, 25.)
   Therefore the church ought "not to be carried about with divers and
   strange doctrines." (Heb. xiii. 9.)

   XIX. The last proposition remains to be discussed. It commends to us
   the perfection of the prophetical and apostolical Scriptures; and for
   establishing it we produce the following arguments. (1.) This
   perfection is taught in the express testimonies of Scripture, which
   prohibit any addition to be made to those things which the Lord has
   commanded; and the same scriptures teach, in a manner the most
   convincing, that these testimonies must be understood concerning the
   written word. (Deut. iv. 2; 12, 28; xxx, 10-14; xxviii, 58; Josh. i. 7,
   8.) The apostle therefore requires, that "no one be wise above what is
   written," (1 Cor. iv. 6;) and he who tells the Ephesians, "I have not
   shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God," (Acts xx. 27,)
   confesses, that "he said none other things than those which the
   prophets and Moses did say should come." (Acts xxvi. 22.)

   XX. (2.) This perfection is also established by the very object and
   matter of the saving doctrine. This is done by various methods. (i.)
   The entire matter of the saving doctrine consists of "the truth which
   is after godliness;" (Tit. i. 1.) But the Scripture perfectly delivers
   this truth, for it is concerning God and Christ, and the manner in
   which He is to be known, acknowledged and worshipped. (1 Chron. xxviii.
   9; John xvii. 3; v, 23.) (ii.) The Scripture perfectly delivers the
   doctrine of faith, hope, and charity. But in those acts is contained
   whatsoever God requires of us. (1 John v. 13;1 Timothy iii. 16; Rom.
   xv. 4; 1 Thess. i. 3; Tit. ii. 12, 13.) (3.) They are called "the
   Scriptures of the Old and New Testament," because in them both these
   parts are completely comprehended. But nothing can be added to a
   Testament: nay, the testament of a prudent testator fully contains his
   last will, according to which he wishes the distribution of his
   property to be made, and his heirs to regulate their conduct. (2 Cor.
   iii. 6; Gal. iii. 15; Jer. xxxi. 31-34; xxxii, 38-40; Gal. iv. 1, 2.)
   But the whole of the saving doctrine consists of a description of the
   beneficence of God towards us, and of our duty towards God. (4.) The
   division of all this saving doctrine into the LAW and the GOSPEL, as
   into parts which draw forth the amplitude of the whole, proves the same
   thing, since both of them are perfectly contained in the Scriptures.
   (Luke xvi. 16; Josh i. 8; Luke i. 1-4; Rom. i. 2-6; Acts xxvi. 22, 23.)

   XXI. (3.) The same perfection is proved from the end and efficacy of
   the whole of the saving doctrine. If the Scriptures propose this entire
   end and perfectly accomplish it, there is no reason why we should call
   a doctrine, in what manner soever it may be proposed, more perfect than
   the Scriptures. But they entirely intend this end and efficaciously
   produce it. (Rom. x. 4-10.) "This is his commandment, that we should
   believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one other." (1
   John iii. 23.) "These things are written, that ye might believe that
   Jesus is the Christ," &c. (John xx. 31.) "These things have I written
   unto you, that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and that ye may
   believe on the name of the Son of God." (1 John v. 9-13.) "On these two
   commandments hang all the law and the prophets." (Matt. xxii. 37-40.)
   "Search the Scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life."
   (John v. 39.) The Scriptures prevent men from going down into the place
   of the damned; (Luke xvi. 27-30) and they prevent this sad consequence
   without the addition of any other doctrine whatsoever. For they render
   a man "wise unto salvation through faith, and perfectly furnished unto
   all good works." (2 Tim. iii. 15-17.)

   XXII. (4.) This is also confirmed by the mode of speaking usually
   employed by holy men of God, and by the Scriptures themselves;
   according to which they indiscriminately use the term "Prophets" for
   the writings of the prophets, "the word of prophecy" for the prophetic
   Scriptures, and, on the contrary, "the Scriptures" for the prophets and
   for God himself; by which is signified that the word of God and of the
   prophets is completely one with the Scriptures; and that this word in
   its amplitude does not exceed the Scriptures with regard to those
   things which are necessary. Thus it is said, "King Agrippa, believest
   thou the prophets?." (Acts xxvi. 27,) that is, the writings of the
   prophets. (Luke xvi. 29.) "We have a more sure word of prophecy," that
   is, the word which is comprehended in the writings of the prophets: for
   it is soon afterwards called "prophecy of Scripture." (2 Pet. i. 19,
   20.) "Beginning at Moses and all the prophets, he interpreted to them
   in all the Scriptures what they say concerning Himself." (Luke xxiv.
   27.) And, on the contrary, "The Scripture saith unto Pharaoh," (Rom.
   ix. 17,) that is, God said it by Moses. (Exod. ix. 16.) "The Scripture
   hath concluded all under sin." (Gal. iii. 22.) "For God hath concluded
   them all in unbelief." (Rom. xi. 32.) "The Scripture, foreseeing that
   God, &c., preached before the Gospel unto Abraham." (Gal. iii. 8; Gen.
   xii. 2, 3.)

   XXIII. (5.) In the last place we add the following: No subject can be
   mentioned, by the sole knowledge or the worship of which the church
   ought to bedeck herself with increased honour and dignity, and which
   subject is not comprehended in the Holy Scriptures. Neither can any
   attribute be produced agreeing with any subject of this kind, which it
   is necessary for the church to know about that subject, or for her to
   perform to it, and which the Scriptures do not attribute to that
   subject: (John v. 39; Rom. i. 3; Luke xxiv. 27.) Whence it follows,
   that the Scripture contains all things necessary to be known for the
   salvation of the Church, and for the glory of God. The Papists indeed
   speak and write many things about Mary, the rest of the saints, and
   about the Roman Pontiff; but we affirm, that these are not objects
   either of any knowledge or worship which the church ought to bestow on
   them. And those things which the Papists attribute to them, are such
   as, according to the sure judgment of the scriptures, cannot be
   attributed to them without sacrilege and a perversion of the gospel of
   Christ.

   XXIV. We conclude, then, that all things which have been, are now, or
   to the final consummation will be necessary for the salvation of the
   church, have been of old perfectly inspired, declared and written; and
   that no other revelation or tradition, than those which have been
   inspired, declared and contained in the scriptures, is necessary to the
   salvation of the church. (2 Tim. iii. 16; Matt. iv. 3, 4; xxii, 29 Acts
   xviii. 28.) Indeed we assert, that whatsoever relates to the doctrine
   of truth is so perfectly comprehended in the scriptures, that all those
   things which are brought either directly or indirectly against this
   truth are capable of being refuted, in a manner the clearest and most
   satisfactory, from the Scriptures themselves alone. This asseveration
   we take with such solemnity and yet assurance of mind, that as soon as
   anything has been proved not to be contained in the scriptures, from
   this very circumstance we infer that thing not to be necessary to
   salvation; and whenever it is evident, that any sentiment cannot be
   refuted by the Scriptures, we judge from this that it is not heretical.
   When, therefore, the Papists sedulously attempt to destroy the whole
   perfection of Scripture by specimens of articles, which they call
   necessary, but which are not proved from Scripture, and by those which
   they consider heretical but which are not confuted from Scripture the
   sole result of their endeavours is, that we cannot conclude with any
   certainty the former to be necessary and the latter heretical.

   XXV. In the mean time we do not deny, that the apostles delivered to
   the churches some things which related to the external discipline,
   order and rites to be observed in them, and which have not been
   written, or at least are not comprehended in those of their books which
   we call "Canonical." (1 Cor. xi. 34) But those things do not concern
   the substance of saving doctrine; and are neither necessary to
   salvation, perpetual, immutable, nor universal, but accommodated to the
   existing state and circumstances of the church.

   XXVI. We likewise confess, that individual churches, or great numbers,
   or even all of them, if they can agree together in unity, may frame
   certain ritual Canons relative to their mutual order and decorum, (1
   Cor. xiv. 40,) and to the discharge of those functions which minister
   to edification; provided those rites be neither contrary to the written
   word, superstitious, nor difficult of observance in consequence of
   being numerous and burdensome. (Col. ii. 8; Acts xv. 10, 28.) This
   proviso is needful to prevent those rites from being considered as a
   part of Divine worship, or from becoming prejudicial to the liberty of
   the church, whose equitable "power" in abrogating, changing, or
   amplifying them, is always subservient to "edification and not to
   destruction." (1 Cor. xiv. 5, 26; 2 Cor. xiii. 10.) In this sense we
   admit the distinction of Traditions into Written and Unwritten,
   Apostolical and Ecclesiastical; and we call those men "violators of
   order," (2 Thess. iii, 6; 1 Cor. xiv. 32, 33,) who oppose
   ecclesiastical canons that are constituted in this manner, or exclaim
   against them by their own private authority.
     __________________________________________________________________

  DISPUTATION 3

  ON THE SUFFICIENCY AND PERFECTION OF THE HOLY SCRIPTURES IN

  OPPOSITION TO HUMAN TRADITIONS

  RESPONDENT: DE COIGNEE

   Because the Papists contend for unwritten traditions, against the
   entire perfection of Scripture, as if it were for every thing sacred
   and dear to them. that they may be able to obtrude, on mankind, many
   dogmas, which, even by their own confession, are not comprised in the
   Scriptures, and to assume to themselves an irrefragible authority in
   the church; it seems, that we shall not spend our time unprofitably,
   if, in a few Theses, we discuss in the fear of God what ought to be
   maintained on the subject of Divine traditions and on the opinion of
   the Papists.

   I. The word "Tradition," according to its derivation, signifies the act
   of delivering; but having been enlarged through usage to denote the
   object about which the act is occupied, it also signifies the doctrine
   itself that is delivered. We ascribe this epithet, in either or both of
   its senses, to a Divine acceptation, on account of its cause which is
   God, to distinguish it from that which is human. (1 Cor. ii. 12, 13.)
   And we say, "That is excellently Divine which is such at the same time
   in its act and in its object." We define it, Divine doctrine,
   manifested by a Divine act, with less excellence, by men; because,
   however Divine it is in its object, still it is human in the act of
   tradition. (2 Pet. i. 21.) The apostle Paul had regard to this when he
   said, "As a wise master-builder, I have laid the foundation, and
   another buildeth thereon. But let every man take heed how he buildeth
   thereupon." (1 Cor. iii. 10.) And St. Peter, when he said, "if any man
   speak, let him speak as the oracles of God." (1 Pet. iv. 11.)

   II. Divine tradition, both with respect to its object and to its act,
   is variously distributed. In regard to its object. (1.) According to
   the actions which it requires to be performed to itself by men, we
   distinguish it into that which is of Faith, (1 John v. 13,) and to
   which we add hope, and into that which relates to morals. In the first,
   it is offered as an object to be believed, in the other as one to be
   performed. (Luke xxiv. 27; Mark i. 15; Matt. xxi. 22, 23; ix, 13.) (2.)
   From the adjuncts of the act required, we call one act necessary to
   righteousness and salvation, while another is supplementary to that
   which is necessary. (Heb. ix. 10.) (3.) From the duration of time, we
   call one perpetual and immutable, another temporary and subject to
   change according to the appointment of its author. (John iv. 21-23.)
   (4.) According to its extent, we call one universal, which binds all
   believers either those of all ages of the world, or those who exist at
   the same time; and another particular, which has reference to certain
   persons whether they be many or few, such as that which respects the
   legal ceremonies and the Levitical priesthood. (Rom. 2,:26, 27.)

   III. Tradition is distinguished, in regard to the act. (1.) From its
   subject, into internal and external. An internal one is that which is
   made to the mind by the illumination and inspiration of the Holy
   Spirit. (Isa. lix. 21; with Ephes. i. 17-21.) To this we likewise refer
   that which is made to the internal senses, by sensible images formed in
   the inward receptacle of images. (1 Cor. ii. 10.) An external tradition
   is that which is made by means of signs presented to the external
   senses; among these the principal place is occupied by the word, in the
   delivery of which, two methods are employed, an enunciation made by
   oral speech and writing. (Rom. x. 17; 1 Cor. i. 28; 2 Thess. ii. 13-14;
   Gen. iii. 9-19; xii, 1-3; Ezek. ii. 5; v, 1-3. (2.) From its causes,
   into immediate and mediate. An immediate one is that which proceeds
   from God, without the intervention of man. Let permission also be
   granted, to us, for the sake of greater convenience of doctrine, to
   reckon under immediate tradition that which is made by angels, lest we
   be compelled to introduce many mediate traditions subordinate to each
   other. A mediate act of tradition is that which is performed by God, as
   the chief author, through the hands of a man peculiarly sanctified for
   its execution. (3.) According to its dignity and authority, it may be
   distributed into primary and secondary; so that the primary may be one,
   transacted indeed by man, but by a man so instructed and governed by
   the inspiration and direction of the Holy Spirit, (2 Sam. xxiii. 2, 3,)
   that "it may not be he himself that speaks, but the Spirit of the
   Father that is in him;" (Matt. x. 20;) that he may not himself be the
   crier, but the voice of God crying;" not himself the Scribe, but the
   amanuensis of the Holy Spirit. (2 Tim. iii. 16; 2 Pet. i. 21.) The
   secondary is that which is indeed according to the appointment of God,
   but by the will of man who administers the act of tradition at his own
   option. (1 Pet. iv, 11.)

   IV. Internal tradition is always and absolutely necessary to the
   salvation of men. For in no way, except by a revelation and an inward
   sealing of the Holy Spirit, (2 Cor. i. 20-22) can any man perceive, and
   by an assured faith apprehend the mind of God, however it may be
   manifested and confirmed by external signs. (1 Cor. ii. 10-16.)
   External tradition is necessary through the pleasure of the Divine
   will, whether we consider that will universally; for without it he can
   abundantly instruct the mind of man. (1 Cor. 3,:7-10; 2 Cor. iv. 6.) Or
   whether we consider it according to special modes; for it is sometimes
   delivered by the pronunciation of lively sounds, and at other times by
   writing, and at times by both methods, according to his own good
   pleasure, and which of them soever he has seen proper to employ. (1
   Cor. v. 9; Exod. 24,:7; 2 Thess. ii. 13, 14; Luke xvi. 27-31.) It is,
   from this very circumstance, necessary to men; and from it the
   inconclusiveness of this argument is apparent, "Because God formerly
   instructed his own church without the Scriptures by the words which he
   spoke himself, therefore, the Scriptures are now unnecessary."

   V. Though all the doctrines delivered by God, either from his own lips
   or in writing, possess Divine authority; yet we may distinguish between
   them, and may, according to certain respects, claim a greater authority
   for one than for another. (1.) The efficient cause makes the principal
   difference. For whatever doctrine it wills more, [than any other,] it
   makes that doctrine be of greater authority. Thus it is said, "I will
   have mercy, and not sacrifice." (Matt. ix. 13.) (2.) The condition of
   him who administers the doctrine, obtains for it a greater or a less
   degree of authority. "For if the word spoken by angels, was steadfast,"
   etc, how much more is the doctrine which is announced to us by the Son?
   (Heb. ii. 2-5.) (3.) The object of the doctrine produces the same
   effect. For, according to it, some precepts are called "the weightier
   matters of the law," (Matt. xxiii. 23,) while others are called "the
   least commandments" (Matt. v. 19;) and thus the precepts of the second
   table yield to those of the first. (Luke xiv. 26.) In this view the
   Apostle said, "This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all
   acceptation," in which expression let the emphatic word be observed,
   "that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am
   chief." (1 Tim. i. 15.) (4.) The nearer and more leading tendency which
   any doctrine has to the end proposed by the whole, the greater
   prevalence and authority does it possess. "If the ministration of death
   and of condemnation is glorious, how much more doth the ministration of
   life and righteousness exceed in glory!" (2 Cor. iii. 9.) (5.) The very
   mode of delivery adds weight to the authority. For, lest that should
   escape which had before been delivered only in words, the author
   himself commits it to writing, and thus, when by a double act, it is
   entrusted to the memory of others, he points it out in a manner far
   more excellent, than if he had been content to recommend it solely by
   pronouncing it in words. (2 Pet. iii. 1, 2.) And here let the
   hypothesis be observed, in which it is presupposed that the matter had
   been delivered partly by speaking and by writing, and partly by
   speaking alone. The more frequent and solicitous recommendation of the
   written doctrine serves to strengthen this argument. (Deut. xvii. 19; 1
   Tim. iv. 13; 2 Pet. i. 19.)

   VI. Having given this exposition of the subject, let us proceed with
   the controversy which we have with the Papists, and pass upon it a few
   brief animadversions. It seems to be comprehended in these three
   questions. (1.) Is every doctrine already delivered, which has been, is
   now, or ever will be necessary to the salvation of the church? Does any
   thing of this kind yet remain to be delivered? And if it has been
   really delivered, when was that done? (2.) In what are those doctrines
   contained which it is necessary for the church to believe and practice
   in order to be saved? Are they in the Scriptures alone; or partly in
   the Scriptures, and partly in unwritten traditions from their first
   author? (3.) How can it be made evident with certainty to the
   consciences of believers, that any particular doctrine is Divine?

   VII. With regard to the First question, our opinion is, that all the
   doctrines necessary for the salvation of the Church Universal, have
   been already delivered, above fifteen hundred years ago; and that no
   tradition has been made of any new doctrine that is necessary for the
   salvation of believers, since the days of the apostles. We establish
   our opinion by the following arguments: (1.) Because in Christ, and in
   his Gospel, "are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge."
   (Col. ii. 3.) But the apostles have perfectly announced Christ and his
   Gospel; (Acts xx. 26, 27;) so that an anathema is pronounced on him who
   preaches any other gospel than that which the apostles have preached
   and the churches have received. (Gal. i. 8, 9.) But that man preaches
   another gospel, who adds any thing to it as being necessary to the
   salvation of believers. (2.) Because the whole "church has been built
   upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets." (Ephes. ii. 20; Rev.
   xxi. 14.) This is not true, if there be a doctrine necessary to the
   salvation of any church, which has not been revealed through the
   prophets and apostles. (3.) Because the whole Catholic Church is one
   body, consisting of particular churches that possess the same nature
   and principles as the whole; and this Church is animated by one spirit,
   and led into all truth, and being called into one hope of the same
   inheritance, it has "one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and
   Father of all" (Ephes. iv. 4, 6,) and sealed into "the communion of the
   same body and blood of the Lord," by a participation of one cup and
   bread. (1 Cor. x. 16, 17.) (4.) Because "Jesus Christ is the same
   yesterday, and to-day, and forever." Whence the apostle infers, that it
   is wrong for the Church to be "carried about with divers and strange
   doctrines." (Heb. xiii. 8-9.)

   VIII. Though some of the Popish divines profess to assent to this
   truth, yet indications sufficiently manifest of their dissent from it
   are extant in their writings, especially in those of the Canonists. In
   the first place, the epithets of Universal Bishop, Supreme Pastor,
   Prime Head, Bridegroom, the Perfecter and Illuminator of the Catholic
   Church his Bride, which are ascribed to the Roman Pontiff, do not admit
   of this limitation of tradition. Then, the authority of governing,
   commanding and forbidding, of establishing and abrogating laws, of
   judging and condemning, and of loosing and binding, an immense and
   infinite authority, which is not merely attributed to him, but is
   actually assumed and exercised by him, excludes the same kind of
   circumscription. To which may be added the Decree, by which it is
   decided to be necessary for salvation, that every human creature be
   placed in subjection to the Roman Pontiff; and that, by which authentic
   authority is ascribed to the ancient Latin translation of the
   Scriptures. But, not to multiply instances, we hold it for a general
   argument of this dissension, that they dare not enter into an exact
   enumeration of unwritten traditions, and fix the number of them; they
   avoid this, that they may reserve to themselves the power of producing
   tradition in any controversy. Some of them, therefore, assert, that
   other doctrines are necessary according to the different states of the
   Church.

   IX. But we most willingly confess, that the tradition which we call
   secondary will continue in the Church to the end of the world; for by
   it the doctrines which have, through the prophets and apostles, been
   committed to her, are by her, further dispensed to her children. For
   this reason, the Church is called "the pillar and ground of the truth,"
   (1 Tim. iii. 15,) but only secondarily after the apostles, who, on
   account of the primary tradition, are distinguished by the title of
   "pillars," (Gal. ii. 9,) and "foundations," (Rev. xxi. 14,) before
   those epithets were bestowed on the church.

   X. With regard to the Second question, [ 6,] we say that the canonical
   Scriptures of the Old and New Testament perfectly contain all doctrines
   which are necessary to the salvation of believers and the glory of God.
   This is manifest, (1.) From express testimonies of Scripture, [see
   Disputation 2, Thesis 19,] forbidding any addition to be made to those
   things which have been commanded, and commanding that "no man be wise
   above what is written," (1 Cor. iv. 6,) though in the former of these,
   it is evident from the text that Moses is speaking about those precepts
   which were comprised in writing. (2.) From the very substance of the
   doctrines; and this in various ways. The scriptures contain in a
   complete form the doctrine of the Law and of the Gospel; they also
   perfectly embrace the doctrine of faith, hope and charity. They deliver
   the full knowledge of God and of Christ, in which is placed life
   eternal. They are called, and truly so, "the Scriptures of the Old and
   New Testament;" but to a testament nothing ought to be added. (3.) From
   the end at which they aim and which they attain. "These things are
   written, that ye may believe; and that, believing, ye may have life."
   (John xx. 31.) "Search the Scriptures; for in them ye think ye have
   eternal life." (v, 39.) (4.) From their efficacy; because, without [the
   aid of] any other doctrine, they sufficiently hinder any man from going
   into the place of torment, (Luke xvi. 28, 29;) and they render "the man
   of God wise unto salvation through faith, and thoroughly furnished unto
   all good works." (2 Tim. iii. 15-17.) (5.) From the manner of speech
   usually employed in the Scriptures, by which "the prophets" are
   understood to mean the writings of the prophets, "the prophets" and
   "the word of prophecy" signify the prophecies of Scripture. (2 Pet. i.
   19-21.) What God said and did is ascribed to the Scriptures: thus, For
   the Scriptures saith unto Pharaoh;" (Rom. ix. 17;) "the Scripture,
   foreseeing, &c., preached before the gospel unto Abraham;' (Gal. iii.
   8;) "the Scripture hath concluded all under sin." (iii, 22.)

   XI. The Papists assert, on the contrary, that all things necessary to
   salvation are not contained in the Scriptures; but partly in the
   Scriptures, and partly in unwritten traditions. This their opinion they
   endeavour to establish, not only by the Scriptures themselves, but by
   the testimonies of Popes, Councils, and Fathers, nay, by certain
   examples which they produce of necessary doctrines which are not
   comprehended within the limits of Scripture. As we shall examine the
   strength of each of these arguments separately in the discussion which
   we have now commenced, we may remark by way of anticipation, that the
   passages of Scripture which they usually quote for this purpose, are
   either forcibly wrested from their correct signification, or do not
   determine the proposition; that the testimonies of Popes, Councils, and
   Fathers, being those of mere men, do not operate to our prejudice; that
   the instances which they adduce are either confirmed from the
   Scriptures, or are not necessary to salvation. This separation we
   consider of such necessity, that when it is once granted that they are
   necessary to salvation, it follows that they can and that they must be
   confirmed by the Scriptures; and when it is granted that they cannot be
   confirmed by the Scriptures, it follows that they are not necessary to
   salvation. So immovable and certain is this truth to our minds, that
   all doctrines necessary to salvation are contained in the Scriptures.

   XII. To the Third question, [ 5,] we reply: As one Delivery of Divine
   doctrine is primary, and another secondary; so likewise one Attestation
   [witnessing] respecting the divinity of the doctrine is primary, while
   another is secondary. (John v. 36, 37; 1 John v. 7.) The Primary
   attestation is that of God himself, to whom it appertains properly,
   originally, and per se to bear witness to his own doctrine. But he
   employs a two-fold mode of bearing witness: one external, which is
   presented to the senses of those to whom the doctrine is proposed,
   (John iii. 2; Heb. ii. 4; 1 Cor. i. 6-8,) and is a preparative for
   creating faith in the doctrine, even when this doctrine is not
   understood. Another internal, which impresses on the mind a true
   understanding of the doctrine, and an undoubted approval of it, which
   is the necessary, proper and immediate cause of that faith which God
   requires to be given to his word, and which alone is saving. The
   Secondary attestation is that of the Church. For having been herself
   certified, by means of the primary attestation, (which is that of God,)
   of the divinity of this doctrine, she both gives her hand and seal as a
   witness that God is true, (John iii. 33,) and she bears her testimony
   to the doctrine received from the God of truth. This testimony is
   pleasing to God, due to the doctrine, honourable to the church, and
   useful to men. (1 John v. 9; John v. 34-36.) But it is to be observed,
   that this testimony of the church is human and not Divine, and is less
   than the preceding, which is potent only in preparing the hearts, by a
   sort of reverence that it obtains for the doctrine, that the hearts so
   prepared may with sincerity, by the internal witnessing of God, yield
   their assent to it. (John xv. 26, 27.) Under that part of the Primary
   testimony which is external, we comprise the testimony of prophets,
   apostles, evangelists, pastors, and teachers, who are "workers together
   with God," provided they have been immediately called [by God himself.]
   But we refer it to the Secondary testimony, if they have been called
   mediately by the church. The Papists, who ascribe less to the internal
   attestation, and more to that which is secondary, than what we have
   explained, are deservedly rejected by us.

   XIII. Having explained these matters, we grant, that the apostles
   delivered to the churches some things relating to order, decency, and
   the rights to be observed in them, which they did not commit to
   writing, (1 Cor. xi. 34;) but those things do not concern the substance
   either of the Law or the Gospel, are not necessary to salvation, are
   neither immutable, perpetual, nor universal, but are accommodated to
   the existing condition of the church, and the circumstances in which
   she is placed. We further grant, that either single churches, or many
   by mutual consent, or that all churches provided they could so agree,
   may frame certain ritual canons for their good order and decency, and
   for such direction in those duties which must of necessity be performed
   in them, as may contribute to their present edification. (1 Cor. xiv.
   40.) But these conditions must be observed respecting them:

   (1.) That these rites be not repugnant to the Written Word. (Col. ii.
   18-23.) (2.) That they neither have superstition intermixed with them,
   nor encourage it. (3.) That they neither be accounted as divine
   worship, nor cast a snare upon consciences. (4.) That they be neither
   more numerous, nor more burdensome in practice, than may render them
   easy of observance. (Acts xv. 10, 28.) (5.) That the church do not
   deprive herself of the liberty of changing, adding, or taking away, as
   she shall consider her present edification to require. Such rites as
   these being usefully established in a church, it is unlawful for any
   one, of his own private authority, to gainsay or attack them, unless he
   be ambitious of having his name emblazoned in the list of disorderly
   persons, and among the disturbers of the peace of church. (1 Cor. xiv.
   32, 33; 2 Thess. iii. 6.)
     __________________________________________________________________

  DISPUTATION 4

  ON THE NATURE OF GOD

   RESPONDENT: JAMES ARMINIUS--WHEN HE STOOD FOR HIS DEGREE OF D. D.

   I. The very nature of things and the Scriptures of God, as well as the
   general consent of all wise men and nations, testify that a nature is
   correctly ascribed to God. (Gal. iv. 8; 2 Pet. i. 4; Aristot. De Repub.
   1. 7, c. 1; Cicero De Nat. Deor.)

   II. This nature cannot be known a priori: for it is the first of all
   things, and was alone, for infinite ages, before all things. It is
   adequately known only by God, and God by it; because God is the same as
   it is. It is in some slight measure known by us, but in a degree
   infinitely below what it is [in] itself; because we are from it by an
   external emanation. (Isa. xliv. 6; Rev. i. 8; 1 Cor. ii. 11; 1 Tim. vi.
   16; 1 Cor. xiii. 9.)

   III. But this nature is known by us, either immediately through the
   unclouded vision of it as it is. This is called "face to face," (1 Cor.
   xiii. 12,) and is peculiar to the blessed in heaven: (1 John iii. 2.)
   Or mediately through analogical images and signs, which are not only
   the external acts of God and his works through them, (Psalm xix. 1-8;
   Rom. i. 20,) but likewise his word, (Rom. x. 14-17,) which, in that
   part in which it proposes Christ, "who is the Image of the Invisible
   God," (Col. i. 15,) as "the brightness of his glory, and the express
   image of his person," (Heb. i. 3,) gives such a further increase to our
   knowledge, that "we all, with open face beholding as in a glass the
   glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to
   glory." (2 Cor. iii. 18.) This is called "through a glass in an
   enigma," or "darkly," and applies exclusively to travelers and pilgrims
   who "are absent from the Lord." (2 Cor. v. 6; Exod. xxxiii. 20.)

   IV. But there are two modes of this second perception from the works
   and the word of God. The First is that of Affirmation, (which is also
   styled by Thomas Aquinas, "the mode of Causality and by the habitude of
   the principle,") according to which the simple perfections which are in
   the creatures, as being the productions of God, are attributed
   analogically to God according to some similitude. (Psalm xciv. 9, 10;
   Matt. vii. 11; Isa. xlix. 15.) The Second is that of Negation or
   Removal, according to which the relative perfections and all the
   imperfections which appertain to the creatures, as having been produced
   out of nothing, are removed from God. (Isa. iv. 8, 9; 1 Cor. i. 25.) To
   the mode of Affirmation, (because it is through the habitude of the
   cause and principle, to the excellence of which no effect ever rises,)
   that of Pre-eminence must be added, according to which the perfections
   that are predicated of the creatures are understood [to be] infinitely
   more perfect in God. (Isa. xl. 15, 17, 22, 25.) Though this mode be
   affirmative and positive in itself, (for as the nature of God
   necessarily exists, so it is necessarily known,) in positively and not
   in negation; yet it cannot be enunciated or expressed by us, except
   through a Negation of those modes according to which the creatures are
   partakers of their own perfections, or the perfections in creatures are
   circumscribed. Those modes, being added to the perfections of the
   creatures, produce this effect, that those which, considered without
   them, were simple perfections, are relative perfections, and by that
   very circumstance are to be removed from God. Hence it appears, that
   the mode of Pre-eminence does not differ in species from the mode of
   Affirmation and Negation.

   V. Besides, in the entire nature of things and in the Scriptures
   themselves, only two substances are found, in which is contained every
   perfection of things. They are Essence and Life, the former of them
   constituting the perfection of all existing creatures; the latter, that
   of only some them, and those the most perfect. (Gen. 1; Psalm civ. 29,
   148; Acts xvii. 28.) Beyond these two the human mind cannot possibly
   comprehend any substance, indeed, it cannot raise its conceptions to
   any other: for it is itself circumscribed within the limits of created
   nature, of which it forms a part; it is therefore incapable of passing
   beyond the circle which encloses the whole. (Rev. i. 8; iv, 8; Dan. vi.
   46.) Wherefore in the nature of God himself, only these two causes of
   motion, Essence and Life, can become objects of our consideration.

   LET THE FOLLOWING BE OUR PROBLEMS

   Have a corporeal Essence, and a vegetative and sensitive Life, any
   analogy to the Essence and Life of God, though such analogy be less
   than a spiritual Essence and an intellectual Life?

   If they have this analogy, how are body and senses removed simply from
   God?

   If they have not this analogy, how has God been able to produce this
   kind of Essence and Life?

   VI. But in God both these are to be considered in the mode of
   Pre-eminence, that is, in excellence far surpassing the Essence and
   Life of all the creatures. (Psalm cii. 27; 1 Tim. vi. 16.)

   THE ESSENCE OF GOD

   VII. The Essence of God is that by which God exists; or it is the first
   cause of motion of the Divine Nature by which God is understood to
   exist.

   VIII. Because every Essence, which is either in the superior or in the
   inferior nature of things, is distributed into spiritual and corporeal,
   (Col. i. 16;) of which, the former notes simply perfection, the latter
   a defection or defect from this perfection. On this account we separate
   corporeal Essence from God according to the mode of removal, and at the
   same time all those things which belong to a corporeal Essence as such,
   whether it be simple or compound--such as magnitude, figure, place, or
   parts, whether sensible or imaginable. Whence also He cannot be
   perceived by the corporeal senses, either by those which are external
   or by the internal, since he is invisible, intactable, and incapable of
   being represented. (Deut. iv. 14; 1 Kings viii. 1 Luke xxiv. 39; John
   iv. 24; 1 Tim. i. 17.) But we ascribe to Him a spiritual Essence, and
   that in the mode of preeminence, as "the Father of Spirits." (Heb. xii.
   9.)

   Therefore,

   (1.) We reject the dogma of the Anthropo-morphites, [those who
   maintained that "the uncorruptable God" had a form or body "like to
   corruptible man,"] and the intolerable custom of the Papists, which
   they constantly practice, in fashioning a [supposed] likeness of God's
   Essence. (Deut. iv. 15, 16; Rom. i. 23; Isa. xl. 18; Acts xvii. 29.)

   (2.) When bodily members are attributed in the Scriptures to God, that
   is done on account of the simplicity of those effects, which the
   creatures themselves usually produce only by the aid and operation of
   those members.

   IX. As we ought to enunciate negatively the mode by which the Essence
   of God pre-eminetly both is and is spiritual, above the excellence of
   all Essences, even of those which are spiritual; so this may be done
   first and immediately in a single phrase, "he is, anarcov kai anaitiov
   without beginning and without cause either external or internal." (Isa.
   xliii. 10; xliv, 8, xxiv, ; xlvi, 9; Rev. i. 8; Rom. xi. 35, 36; 1 Cor.
   viii. 4-6; Rom. ix. 5.) For since there cannot be any advancement in
   infinitum, (for if there could, there would be no Essence, no
   Knowledge,) there must be one Essence, above and before which no other
   can exist: but such an Essence must that of God be; for, to whatsoever
   this Essence may be attributed, it will by that very act of ascription
   be God himself.

   X. Because the Essence of God is devoid of all cause, from this
   circumstance arise, in the first place, Simplicity and Infinity of
   Being in the Essence of God.

   Simplicity is a preeminent mode of the Essence of God, by which he is
   void of all composition, and of component parts whether they belong to
   the senses or to the understanding. He is without composition, because
   without external cause; and He is without component parts, because
   without internal cause. (Rom. xi. 35, 36; Heb. 2,:10; Isa. xl. 12, 22.)
   The Essence of God, therefore, neither consists of material, integral
   and quantitive parts, of matter and form, of kind and difference, of
   subject and accident, nor of form and the thing formed, (for it is to
   itself a form, existing by itself and its own individuality,) neither
   hypothetically and through nature, through capability and actuality,
   nor through essence and being. Hence God is his own Essence and his own
   Being, and is the same in that which is, and that by which it is. He is
   all eye, ear, hand and foot, because he entirely sees, hears, works,
   and is in every place. (Psalm cxxxix. 8- 12.)

   THEREFORE,

   Whatever is absolutely predicated about God, it is understood
   essentially and not accidentally; and those things, (whether many or
   diverse,) which are predicated concerning God, are, in God, not many
   but one: (James i. 17.) It is only in our mode of considering them,
   which is a compound mode, that they are distinguished as being many and
   diverse; though this may, not inappropriately, be said, because they
   are likewise distinguished by a formal reason.

   XII. Infinity of Being is a preeminent mode of the Essence of God, by
   which it is devoid of all limitation and boundary, (Psalm cxlv. 3; Isa.
   xliii. 10,) whether from something above it or below it, from something
   before it or after it. It is not bounded by anything above it, because
   it has received its being from no one. Nor by anything below it,
   because the form, which is itself, is not limited to the capacity of
   any matter whatsoever that may be its recipient. Neither by any thing
   before it, because it is from nothing efficient: nor after it, because
   it does not exist for the sake of another end. But, His Essence is
   terminated inwardly by its own property, according to which it is what
   it is and nothing else. Yet by this no limits are prescribed to its
   Infinity; for by the very circumstance, that it is its own being,
   subsisting through itself, neither received from another nor in
   another, it is distinguished, from all others, and others are removed
   from it. (Isa. xliv. 9; Rom. xi. 36; Prov. xvi,

   4.) THEREFORE,

   Whatsoever is predicated absolutely about God, is predicated concerning
   Him immediately, primarily, and without [respect to] cause.

   XIII. From the Simplicity and Infinity of the Divine sense, arise
   Infinity with regard to time, which is called "Eternity;" and with
   regard to place, which is called "Immensity;" Impassability,
   Immutability, and Incorruptibility.

   XIV. Eternity is a pre-eminent mode of the Essence of God, by which it
   is devoid of time with regard to the term or limits of beginning and
   end, because it is of infinite being; it is also devoid of time with
   regard to the succession of former and latter, of past and future,
   because it is of simple being, which is never in capability, but always
   in act, (Gen. xxi. 33; Psalm xc. 9; Isa. xliv. 6; 2 Tim. i. 9.)
   According to this mode, therefore, the Being of God is always the
   universal, the whole, the plentitude of his essence, closely, fixedly,
   and at every instant present with it, resembling a moment which is also
   devoid of intelligible parts, and never flows onward progressively, but
   always continues within itself. It will be lawful, therefore, for us,
   with Boetius, to define Eternity in the following manner, after
   changing, by his good leave, the word Life into that of Essence: "It is
   an interminable, entire and at the same time, a perfect possession of
   Essence. But it seems that I may by some sort of right require this
   change to be made, because Essence comes to be considered in the first
   moving cause of the Divine Nature, before Life; and because Eternity
   does not belong to Essence through Life, but to Life through Essence.

   THEREFORE,

   Whatsoever things are predicated absolutely concerning God, they belong
   to Him from all eternity and all together. It is certain that those
   things which do not from all eternity belong to Him, are predicated
   about Him not absolutely, but in reference to the creatures, such as,
   "He is the Creator, the Lord, the Judge of all men."

   XV. Immensity is a pre-eminent mode of the Essence of God, by which it
   is void of place according to space and limits: being co-extended
   space, because it belongs to simple entity, not having part and part,
   therefore not having part beyond part. Being also its own encircling
   limits, or beyond which it has no existence, because it is of infinite
   entity: and, before all things, God alone was both the world, and
   place, and all things to himself; but He was alone, because there was
   nothing outwardly beyond, except himself. (1 Kings viii. 27; Job xi. 8,
   9.)

   XVI. After creatures, and places in which creatures are contained, have
   been granted to have an existence, from this Immensity follows the
   Omnipresence or Ubiquity of the Essence of God, according to which it
   is entirely wheresoever any creature or any place is, and this in exact
   similarity to a [mathematical] point, which is totally present to the
   entire circumference, and to each of its parts, and yet without
   circumscription. If there be any difference, it arises, from the Will,
   the Ability and the Act of God. (Psalm cxxxix. 8-12; Isa. lxvi. 1; Jer.
   xxiii. 24; Acts xvii. 27, 28.)

   XVII. Impassability is a pre-eminent mode of the Essence of God,
   according to which it is devoid of all suffering or feeling; not only
   because nothing can act against this Essence, for it is of infinite
   Being and devoid of an external cause; but likewise because it cannot
   receive the act of anything, for it is of simple Entity. THEREFORE,
   Christ has not suffered according to the Essence of his Deity.

   XVIII. Immutability is a pre-eminent mode of the Essence of God, by
   which it is void of all change; of being transferred from place to
   place, because it is itself its own end and good, and because it is
   immense; of generation and corruption; of alteration; of increase and
   decrease; for the same reason as that by which it is incapable of
   suffering. (Psalm cii. 27; Mal. iii. 6; James i. 17.) Whence likewise,
   in the Scriptures, Incorruptibility is attributed to God. Nay, even
   motion cannot happen to Him through operation; for it appertains to
   God, and to Him alone, to be at rest in operation. (Rom. i. 23; Isa.
   xl. 28.)

   XIX. These modes of the Essence of God belong so peculiarly to Him, as
   to render them incapable of being communicated to any other thing; and
   of whatever kind these modes may be, they are, according to themselves,
   as proper to God as His Essence itself, without which they cannot be
   communicated, unless we wish to destroy it after despoiling it of its
   peculiar modes of being; and according to analogy, they are more
   peculiar to Him than his Essence, because they are pre-eminent, for
   nothing can be analogous to them. THEREFORE, Christ, according to his
   humanity, is not in every place.

   XX. Since Unity and Good are the general affections of Being, the same
   are also to be attributed to God, but with the mode of pre-eminence,
   according to the measure of the Simplicity and Infinity of his Essence.
   (Gen. i. 31; Matt. xix. 17.)

   XXI. The Unity of the Essence of God is that according to which it is
   in every possible way so at one in itself, as to be altogether
   indivisible with regard to number, species, genus, parts, modes, &c.
   (Deut. iv. 35; 1 Cor. viii)

   XXII. It appertains also to the Essence of God, to be divided from
   every other thing: and to be incapable of entering into the composition
   of any other thing: while some persons ascribe this property to the
   Simplicity and others to the Unity of God's Essence, several attribute
   it to both. But on reading the Scriptures, we find that Holiness is
   frequently ascribed to God, which usually designates a separation or
   setting apart; on this account, perhaps, that very thing by which God
   is thus divided from others, may, without any impropriety, be called by
   the name of Holiness. (Josh. xxiv. 19; Isa. vi. 3; Gen. ii. 3; Exod.
   xiii. 2; 1 Pet. ii. 2-9; 1 Thess. v. 23.) THEREFORE,

   God is neither the soul of the world, nor the form of the universe; He
   is neither an inherent form, nor a bodily one.

   XXIII. The Goodness of the Essence of God is that according to which it
   is, essentially in itself, the Supreme and very Good; from a
   participation in which all other things have an existence and are good;
   and to which all other things are to be referred as to their supreme
   end: for this reason it is called communicable. (Matt. xix. 17; Jas. i.
   17; 1 Cor. x. 31.)

   XXIV. These modes and affections are so primarily attributed to the
   Essence of God, that they ought to be deduced through all the rest of
   those things which come under our consideration in the latter momentum
   of the Divine Nature. If this deduction be made, especially through
   those things which appertain to the operation of God, then the most
   abundant utility will redound to us from them and from our knowledge of
   them. This benefit, however, they will not perform for us, if they be
   made subjects of consideration only in this momentum in the Divine
   Nature. (Mal. iii. 6; Num. xxiii. 19; Lament. iii. 22; Hosea xi. 9.)

   ON THE LIFE OF GOD

   XXV. The Life of God, which comes to be considered under the second
   [momentum] cause of motion in the Divine Nature, is an act flowing from
   the Essence of God, by which his Essence is signified to be in action
   within itself. (Psalm xlii. 2; Heb. iii. 12; Num. xiv. 21.)

   XXVI. We call it "an act flowing from his essence;" because, as our
   understanding forms a conception of essence and life in the nature of
   God under distinct forms, and of the essence as having precedence of
   the life; we must beware lest the life be conceived as an act
   approaching to the essence similar to unity, which, when added to
   unity, makes it binary or two-fold. But it must be conceived as an act
   flowing from the essence, which advances itself to its own perfection,
   in the same manner as a [mathematical] point by its flowing moves
   itself forward in length, [ 14.] It is our wish, that these things be
   understood only by the confined capacity of our consideration, who are
   compelled to use the words of our darkness, in order in any degree to
   adumbrate or represent that light to which no mortal can approach.

   XXVII. We say "that the Divine Essence is in action by means of the
   life;" because the acts of God, the internal as well as the external,
   those which are directed inwards and those directed outwards, must all
   be ascribed to His life as to their proximate and immediate principle.
   (Heb. iv. 12.) For it is in reference to his life, that God the Father
   produces out of his own essence his Word and his Spirit; and in
   reference to his life, God understands, wills, is able to do, and does,
   all those things which He understands, wills, is able to do, and
   actually does. Hence, since blessedness consists in action, it is with
   propriety ascribed to life. (1 Tim. i. 11; Rom. vi. 23.) This also
   seems to be the cause why it was the will of God, that his oath should
   be expressed in these words, "THE LORD LIVETH." (Jer. iv. 2.)

   XXVIII. The life of God is his essence itself, and his very being;
   because the Divine Essence is in every respect simple, as well as
   infinite, and therefore, eternal and immutable. On this account, to it,
   and indeed to it alone, is attributed immortality, which, therefore,
   cannot be communicated to any creature. (1 Tim. i. 17; vi, 16.) It is
   immense, without increase and decrease; it is one and undivided, holy
   and set apart from all things; it is good, and therefore communicable,
   and actually communicative of itself, both by creation and
   preservation, and by habitation commenced in this life, to be
   consummated in the life to come. (Gen. ii. 7; Acts xvii. 28; Rom. viii.
   10, 11; 1 Cor. xv. 28.)

   XXIX. But the life of God is active in three faculties, in the
   understanding, the will, and the power or capability properly so
   called. In the Understanding, inwardly considering its object of what
   kind soever, whether it be one [with it] or united to it in the act of
   understanding. In the Will, inwardly willing its first, chief, and
   proper object; and extrinsically willing the rest. In the Power, or
   capability operating only extrinsically, which may be the cause of its
   being called by the particular name of capability, as being that which
   is capable of operating on all its objects, before it actually
   operates.

   ON THE UNDERSTANDING OF GOD

   XXX. The understanding of God is a faculty of his life, which is the
   first in nature as well as in order, and by which He distinctly
   understands all things and every thing which now have, will have, have
   had, can have, or might hypothetically have, any kind of being; by
   which He likewise distinctly understands the order which all and each
   of them hold among themselves, the connections and the various
   relations which they have or can have; not excluding even that entity
   which belongs to reason, and which exists, or can exist, only in the
   mind, imagination, and enunciation. (Rom. xi. 33.)

   XXXI. God, therefore, understands himself. He knows all things
   possible, whether they be in the capability of God or of the creature;
   in active or passive capability; in the capability of operation,
   imagination, or enunciation. He knows all things that could have an
   existence, on laying down any hypothesis. He knows other things than
   himself, those which are necessary and contingent, good and bad,
   universal and particular, future, present and past, excellent and vile.
   He knows things substantial and accidental of every kind; the actions
   and passions, the modes and circumstances of all things; external words
   and deeds, internal thoughts, deliberations, counsels, and
   determinations, and the entities of reason, whether complex or simple.
   All these things, being jointly attributed to the understanding of God,
   seem to conduce to the conclusion, that God may deservedly be said to
   know things infinite. (Acts xv. 18; Heb. iv. 13; Matt. xi. 27; Psalm
   cxlvii. 4; Isa. li, 32, 33; liv, 7; Matt. x. 30; Psalm cxxxv. 1 John
   iii. 20; 1 Sam. xvi. 7; 1 Kings viii. 39; Psalm xciv. 11; Isa. xl. 28;
   Psalm cxlvii. 5; 139; xciv, 9, 10; x, 13, 14.)

   XXXII. All the things which God knows, he knows neither by intelligible
   images, nor by similitude, (for it is not necessary for Him to use
   abstraction and application for the purpose of understanding;) but He
   knows them by his own essence, and by this alone, with the exception of
   evil things which he knows indirectly by the opposite good things; as,
   through means of the habitude, privation is discovered.

   Therefore,

   (1.) God knows himself entirely and adequately. For He is all being,
   light and eye. He also knows other things entirely; but excellently, as
   they are in Himself and in his understanding; adequately, as they are
   in their proper natures. (1 Cor. ii. 11; Psalm xciv. 9, 10.)

   (2.) He knows himself primarily; and it is impossible for that which
   God understands first and by itself, to be any other thing than his own
   essence.

   (3.) The act of understanding in God is his own being and essence.

   XXXIII. The mode by which God understands, is not that which is
   successive, and which is either through composition and division, or
   through deductive argumentation; but it is simple, and through infinite
   intuition. (Heb. iv. 13.)

   THEREFORE,

   (1.) God knows all things from eternity; nothing recently. For this new
   perfection would add something to His essence by which He understands
   all things; or his understanding would exceed His essence, if he now
   understood what he did not formerly understand. But this cannot happen,
   since he understands all things through his essence. (Acts xv. 18;

   Ephes. i. 4.)

   (2.) He knows all things immeasurably, without the augmentation and
   decrease of the things known and of the knowledge itself. (Psalm
   cxlvii. 5.)

   (3.) He knows all things immutably, his knowledge not being varied to
   the infinite changes of the things known. (James i. 17)

   (4.) By a single and undivided act, not being diverted towards many
   things but collected into himself, He knows all things. Yet he does not
   know them confusedly, or only universally and in general; but also in a
   distinct and most special manner He knows himself in himself, things in
   their causes, in themselves, in his own essence, in themselves as being
   present, in their causes antecedently, and in himself most
   pre-eminently. (Heb. iv. 13; 1 Kings viii. 39; Psalm cxxxix, 16, 17.)

   (5.) And therefore when sleep, drowsiness and oblivion are attributed
   to God, by these expressions is meant only a deferring of the
   punishment to be inflicted on his enemies, and a delay in affording
   solace and aid to his friends. (Psalm xiii. 1, 2.)

   XXXIV. Although by one, and that a simple act, God understands all
   things, yet a certain order in the objects of his knowledge may be
   assigned to Him without impropriety, indeed, it ought to be for the
   sake of ourselves. (1.) He knows himself. (2.) He knows all things
   possible, which may be referred to three general classes. (i.) Let the
   first be of those things to which the capability of God can immediately
   extend itself, or which may exist by his mere and sole act. (ii.) Let
   the second consist of those things which, by God's preservation,
   motion, aid, concurrence and permission, may have an existence from the
   creatures, whether these creatures will themselves exist or not, and
   whether they might be placed in this or in that order, or in infinite
   orders of things; let it even consist of those things which might have
   an existence from the creatures, if this or that hypothesis were
   admitted. (1 Sam. xxiii. 11, 12; Matt. xi. 21.) (iii.) Let the third
   class be of those things which God can do from the acts of the
   creatures, in accordance either with himself or with his acts. (3.) He
   knows all beings, whether they be considered as future, as past, or as
   present; (Jer. xviii. 6; Isa. xliv. 7;) and of these there is also a
   threefold order. The first order is of those beings which by his own
   mere act shall exist, do exist, or have existed. (Acts xv. 18.) The
   second is of those which will exist, do exist, or have existed, by the
   intervention of the Creatures, either by themselves, or through them by
   God's preservation, motion, aid, concurrence and permission. (Psalm
   cxxxix. 4) The third order consists of those which God will himself do
   or make, does make, or hath made, from the acts of the creatures, in
   accordance either with himself or with his acts. (Deut. 28). This
   consideration is of infinite utility in various heads of theological
   doctrine.

   XXXV. God understands all things in a holy manner, regarding things as
   they are, without any admixture. (Psalm ix. 8; 1 Thess. ii. 4.) On this
   account He is said to judge, not according to the person or appearance
   and the face, but according to truth. (Rom. ii. 2.)

   XXXVI. The understanding of God is certain, and never can be deceived,
   so that He certainly and infallibly sees even future contingencies,
   whether He sees them in their causes or in themselves. (1 Sam. xxiii.
   11, 12; Matt. xi. 21.) But, this certainty rests upon the infinity of
   the essence of God, by which in a manner the most present He
   understands all things.

   XXXVII. The understanding of God is derived from no external cause, not
   even from an object; though if there should not afterwards be an
   object, there would not likewise be the understanding of God about it.
   (Isa. xl. 13, 14; Rom. xi. 33, 34.)

   XXXVIII. Though the understanding of God be certain and infallible, yet
   it does not impose any necessity on things, nay, it rather establishes
   in them a contingency. For since it is an understanding not only of the
   thing itself, but likewise of its mode, it must know the thing and its
   mode such as they both are; and therefore if the mode of the thing be
   contingent, it will know it to be contingent; which cannot be done, if
   this mode of the thing be changed into a necessary one, even solely by
   reason of the Divine understanding. (Acts xxvii. 22-25, 31; xxiii, 11,
   in connection with verses 17, 18, &c., with xxv, 10, 12; and with xxvi,
   32; Rom. xi. 33; Psalm cxlvii. 5.)

   XXXIX. Since God distinctly understands such a variety of things by one
   infinite intuition, Omniscience or All-Wisdom is by a most deserved
   right attributed to Him. Yet this omniscience is not to be considered
   in God according to the mode of the habitude, but according to that of
   a most pure act.

   XL. But the single and most simple knowledge of God may be
   distinguished by some modes, according to various objects and the
   relations to those objects, into theoretical and practical knowledge,
   into that of vision and of simple intelligence.

   XLI. Theoretical knowledge is that by which things are understood under
   the relation of being and of truth. Practical knowledge is that by
   which things are considered under the relation of good, and as objects
   of the will and of the power of God. (Isa. xlviii. 8; xxxvii, 28, xvi,
   5.)

   XLII. The knowledge of vision is that by which God knows himself and
   all other beings, which are, will be, or have been. The knowledge of
   simple intelligence is that by which He knows things possible. Some
   persons call the former "definite" or "determinate," and the latter
   "indefinite" or "indeterminate" knowledge.

   XLIII. The schoolmen say besides, that one kind of God's knowledge is
   natural and necessary, another free, and a third kind middle. (1.)
   Natural or necessary knowledge is that by which God understands himself
   and all things possible. (2.) Free knowledge is that by which he knows,
   all other beings. (3.) Middle knowledge is that by which he knows that
   "if This thing happens, That will take place." The first precedes every
   free act of the Divine will; the second follows the free act of God's
   will; and the last precedes indeed the free act of the Divine will, but
   hypothetically from this act it sees that some particular thing will
   occur. But, in strictness of speech, every kind of God's knowledge is
   necessary. For the free understanding of God does not arise from this
   circumstance, that a free act of His will exhibits or offers an object
   to the understanding; but when any object whatsoever is laid down, the
   Divine understanding knows it necessarily on account of the infinity of
   its own essence. In like manner, any object whatsoever being laid down
   hypothetically, God understands necessarily what will arise from that
   object.

   XLIV. Free knowledge is also called "foreknowledge," as is likewise
   that of vision by which other beings are known; and since it follows a
   free act of the will, it is not the cause of things; it is, therefore,
   affirmed with truth concerning it, that things do not exist because God
   knows them as about to come into existence, but that He knows future
   things because they are future.

   XLV. That kind of God's knowledge which is called "practical," "of
   simple intelligence," and "natural or necessary," is the cause of all
   things through the mode of prescribing and directing, to which is added
   the action of the will and power; (Psalm civ. 24;) although that
   "middle" kind of knowledge must intervene in things which depend on the
   liberty of a created will.

   XLVI. God's knowledge is so peculiarly his own, as to be impossible to
   be communicated to any thing created, not even to the soul of Christ;
   though we gladly confess, that Christ knows all those things which are
   required for the discharge of his office and for his perfect
   blessedness. (1 Kings viii. 39; Matt. xxiv. 36.)

   ON THE WILL OF GOD

   XLVII. By the expression "will of God" is signified properly "the
   faculty itself of willing," but figuratively sometimes "the act of
   willing," and at other times "the object willed." (John vi. 39; Psalm
   cxv. 3.)

   XLVIII. Not only a consideration of the essence and of the
   understanding of God, but also the Scriptures and the universal
   agreement of mankind, testify that a will is correctly attributed to
   God.

   XLIX. This is the second faculty in the life of God, [ 29,] which
   follows the Divine understanding and is produced from it, and by which
   God is borne towards a known good. Towards a good, because it is an
   adequate object of his will. And towards a known good, because the
   Divine understanding is previously borne towards it as a being, not
   only by knowing it as it is a being, but likewise by judging it to be
   good. Hence the act of the understanding is to offer it as a good, to
   the will which is of the same nature as the understanding, or rather,
   which is its own offspring, that it may also discharge its office and
   act concerning this known good. But God does not will the evil which is
   called that of "culpability;" because He does not more will any good
   connected with this evil than He wills the good to which the malignity
   of sin is opposed, and which is the Divine good itself. All the
   precepts of God demonstrate this in the most convincing manner. (Psalm
   v, 4, 5.)

   L. But Good is of two kinds--the Chief Good itself, and that which is
   different from it. (Matt. xix. 17; Gen. i. 31.) The order which
   subsists between them is this: the latter does not exist with the Chief
   Good, but has its existence from it by the Understanding and the Will
   of God. (Rom. xi. 36.) Wherefore the Supreme Good is the primary, the
   choicest, and the direct object of the Divine Will; that is, its own
   infinite Essence, which was alone from all eternity, infinite ages
   prior to the existence of another good; and therefore it is the only
   good. (Prov. viii. 22-24.) On this account it may also be denominated,
   without impropriety, the peculiar and adequate object of the Divine
   Will. Since the Understanding and the Will of God were, each by its own
   act, borne towards this [Essence] they found such a plenitude of Being
   and Goodness in it, that the Understanding gave its judgment for
   commencing the communication of it outwards: and the Will approved of
   this kind of communication, after that method; whence the existence of
   a good, of what kind soever it was, which was different from the Chief
   Good. It cannot, therefore, be called an object of the Divine Will,
   except an indirect one, which God wills on account of that Chief Good,
   or rather He wills it to be on account of the Chief Good. (Prov. xvi.
   4,.) Therefore, The Will of God is the very Essence of God, yet
   distinguished from it according to the formal reason.

   LI. The act by which the Will of God advances towards its objects, is
   (1.) most simple: for as the Understanding of God by a most simple act
   understands its own Essence, and, through it, all other things; so the
   Will of God, by a single and simple act, wills its own goodness, and
   all things in its goodness. (Prov. xvi. 4.) Therefore, the multitude of
   things willed is not repugnant to the simplicity of the Divine Will.
   (Isa. xliii. 7; Ephes. i. 5-9.) (2.) This act is Infinite: for it is
   moved to will, neither by an external cause, by any other efficient,
   nor by an end, which is out of itself; it is not moved even by any
   object which is not itself. (Deut. vii. 7; Matt. xi. 26.) Nay, the
   willing of the end is not the cause of willing those things which are
   for the end; though it wills those things which are for the end to be
   put in order to that end. (Acts xvii. 25, 26; Psalm xvi. 9.) It is no
   valid objection to this truth, that God would not will or do some
   things unless some act of the creature intervened. (1 Sam. ii. 30.)
   (3.) It is Eternal; because nothing can de novo either be or appear
   good to God. (4.) It is Immutable; because that which has once either
   been or seemed good to Him, both is and appears such to Him
   perpetually; and that by which God is known to will any thing, is
   nothing else but this, his immutable entity. (Mal. iii. 6; Rom. xi. 1.)
   (5.) This act is likewise Holy: because God advances towards his object
   only on account of its being good, not on account of any other thing
   which is added to it; and only because his Understanding accounts it
   good, not because feeling inclines [him] towards it without right
   reason. (2 Tim. ii. 19; Rom. ix. 11; 12, 4; Psalm cxix. 137.)

   LII. As the simple and external act by which the Divine Understanding
   knows all its objects, has not excluded order from them; so likewise
   may we be allowed to assign a certain order, according to which the
   simple and sole act of the will of God is borne towards its objects:
   (1.) God wills his own Essence and Goodness, that is, himself. (2.) He
   wills all those things which, by the extreme judgment of his wisdom, He
   hath determined to be made out of infinite beings possible to himself.
   (Prov. xvi. 4.) And, First, He wills to make them. Then, when they are
   made, He is affected towards them by his Will, as they have some
   similitude to his nature. (Gen. i. 31; John xiv. 23.) (3.) The third
   object of the Divine Will are those things which God judges it to be
   right that they should be done by creatures endowed with understanding
   and free-will: and his act of willing concerning these things is
   signified by a precept, in which we likewise include the prohibition of
   that which He wills not to be done by the same creature. (Exod. xx. 1,
   2, &c.; Micah vi. 8.) We allow it to remain a matter of discussion,
   whether counsels can have a place here, provided those things about
   which the consultations are held be not considered as [things] of
   supererogation. (4.) The fourth object of the Divine Will is the Divine
   permission, by which God permits a rational creature to do what He
   forbade, and to omit what he commanded; and which consists of the
   suspension of an efficacious impediment, not of one that is due and
   sufficient. (Acts xiv. 16, 17; Psalm lxxxi. 13; Isa. v. 4) (5.) The
   fifth object of the Divine Will are those things which, according to
   his own infinite wisdom, God judges to be done from the acts of
   rational creatures. (Isa. v. 5; 1 Sam. ii. 30; Gen. xxii. 16, 17.)

   LIII. But though nothing from without be the cause of God's volition,
   yet, since he wills that there should be order in things, (which order
   is placed principally in this, that some things be the causes of
   others,) just so far as God's volition is borne towards those objects,
   it is as if it were the cause of itself as it is borne towards others:
   (Hosea ii. 21, 22.) Thus the cause why He wills the condemnation of any
   one, this, because he wills the order of his justice to be observed
   throughout the universe. (John vi. 40; Deut. vii. 8.) Neither do we
   therefore deny, but that an act of a creature, or the omission of an
   act, may be thus far the occasion or primary cause of a certain Divine
   volition, that, without any consideration of that act or its omission,
   God might set it aside by such a volition. (1 Sam. ii. 30; Jer. xviii.
   7, 8.)

   LIV. Through his own Will, and by means of his Power, God is the cause
   of all other things; (Lam. iii. 37, 38;) yet so that when he acts
   through second causes, either with them or in them, he does not take
   away their own peculiar mode of acting with which they have been
   divinely endued but he suffers them according to their own mode to
   produce their own effects, necessary things necessarily, contingent
   things contingently, free things freely: and this contingency and
   freedom of second causes does not prevent that from being certainly
   done, or coming to pass, which God in this manner works by them; and
   therefore, the certain futurition of an event does not include its
   necessity. (Isa. x. 5, 6, 7; Gen. xlv. 5, 28; Acts xxvii. 29, 31.)

   LV. Though God by a single and undivided act wills all the things which
   he wills; yet his Will, or rather his Volition, may be distinguished
   from the objects, by a consideration of the mode and order according to
   which it is borne towards its objects.

   LVI. The Divine Will is borne towards its object, either according to
   the mode of Nature, or according to the mode of Liberty. According to
   the mode of Nature, it tends towards a primary and proper object, one
   that is suitable and adequate to its nature. According to the mode of
   Liberty, it tends towards all other things. Thus, God by a natural
   necessity wills himself; but He wills freely all other things; (2 Tim.
   ii. 13; Rev. iv. 11;) though the act which is posterior in order may be
   bound by a free act which is prior in order. This may be called
   "hypothetical necessity," having its origin partly from the free
   volition and act of God, partly from the immutability of his nature.
   "For God is not unrighteous," says the Apostle, "to forget the work and
   labour of love" of the pious; because he hath promised them a
   remuneration, and the immutability of his nature does not suffer him to
   rescind his promises. (Heb. vi. 10, 18.)

   LVII. To this must be subjoined another distinction, according to which
   God wills something as an end, and other things as the means to that
   end. His Will tends towards the end by a natural affection or desire;
   and towards the means by a free choice. (Prov. xvi. 4)

   LVIII. The will of God is also distinguished into that by which he
   wills to do or to prevent something, and which is called "the will of
   his good pleasure," or rather "of his pleasure;" (Psalm cxv. 3;) and
   into that by which he wills something to be done, or to be omitted, by
   creatures endued with understanding, and which is called "the will
   which is signified." The latter is revealed; the former is partly
   revealed, and partly hidden. (Mark iii. 35; 1 Thess. iv. 3; Deut. xxix,
   29; 1 Cor. ii. 11, 12.) The former is efficacious, for it uses power,
   either so much as cannot be resisted, or such a kind as He certainly
   knows nothing will withstand: (Psalm xxxiii. 9; Rom. ix. 19.) The
   latter is called "inefficacious," and resistance is frequently made to
   it; yet so that, when the creature transgresses the order of this
   revealed Will, the creature by it may be reduced to order, and that the
   Will of God may be done on those by whom his Will has not been
   performed. (2 Sam. xvii. 14; Isa. v. 4, 5; Matt. xxi. 39-41; Acts v. 4;
   1 Cor. vii. 28.) To this two-fold Will is opposed the Remission of the
   Will, which is called "Permission," and which is also two-fold. The
   one, which permits something to the power of a rational creature, by
   not circumscribing its act with a law; and this is opposed to "the
   revealed Will." The other is that by which God permits something to the
   capability and will of the creature, by not interposing an efficacious
   hindrance; and this is opposed to "the Will of God's pleasure" that is
   efficacious. (Acts xiv. 16; Psalm lxxxi. 13.)

   LIX. The things which God wills to do he wills (1.) either from
   himself, not on account of any cause placed out of himself, whether
   this be without the consideration of any act which proceeds from the
   creature, or solely on occasion of the act of the creature: (Deut. vii.
   7, 8; Rom. xi. 35; John iii. 16.) Or (2.) He does it on account of some
   other previous cause laid down on the part of the creature. (Exod.
   xxxii. 32, 33; 1 Sam. xv. 17, 23.) In regard to this distinction, some
   work is said to be proper to God, and some foreign to Him and his
   "strange work." (Lam. iii. 33; Isa. xxviii. 21.) This is also signified
   by the church in the following words: "O God! whose property is, ever
   to have mercy and to forgive," &c.

   LX. Some persons also distinguish the will of God into that which is
   antecedent, and that which is consequent. This distinction has
   reference to one and the same volition or act of the rational creature,
   which if the act of the Divine will precedes, it is called the
   "antecedent will of God;" (1 Tim. ii. 4;) but if it follows, it is
   called his "consequent will:" (Acts i. 25; Matt. xxiii. 37, 38.) But
   the antecedent will, it appears, ought to be called velleity, rather
   than will.

   LXI. There is not much distance between this distinction, and another,
   according to which God is said to will some things "so far as they are
   good when absolutely considered according to their nature;" but to will
   other things "so far as, after an inspection, of all the circumstances,
   they are understood to be desirable."

   LXII. God also wills some things in their antecedent causes; that is He
   wills their causes as relatively, and places those causes in such
   order, that effects may follow from them; and, if they do follow, that
   they may of themselves be pleasing to him. (Ezek. xxxiii. 11; Gen. iv.
   7.) He wills other things not only in their causes, but also in
   themselves. (John vi. 40; Matt. xi. 25, 26.) incident with this, is the
   distinction of the Divine Will into Conditional and Absolute.

   LXIII. Lastly. God wills some things per se or accidentally.

   He wills per se, those things which are simply and relatively good; (2
   Pet. iii. 9; accidentally, those which are in some respect evil, but
   which have such good things united with them as He wills in preference
   to the respective good things which are opposed to those evil ones:
   thus, He wills the evils of punishment, because he would rather have
   the order of justice preserved in punishment, than suffer an offending
   creature to go unpunished. (Jer. ix. 9 Psalm i. 21; Jer. xv, 6.)

   LET THE FOLLOWING BE PROBLEMS TO US

   (1.) Is it possible for two affirmatively contrary volitions of God to
   tend towards one and the same uniform object?

   (2.) Is it possible for one volition of God to tend towards contrary
   objects? lxiv. In this momentum of the Divine Nature, come under
   consideration those attributes which are ascribed to him in the
   Scriptures, either properly or figuratively, according to a certain
   analogy of affections and moral virtues in us; such as are love,
   hatred, goodness, mercy, desire, anger, justice, &c.

   LXV. Those things which have the analogy of affections may be
   commodiously referred to two principal kinds. So the first can embrace
   those which we may call primary or principal; the second, those which
   are derived from the primary.

   LXVI. 1The first or principal are Love, (whose opposition is Hatred,)
   and Goodness; and with these are connected Grace, Benignity and Mercy.

   LXVII. Love is an affection of union in God, the objects of which are
   God himself and the good of justice or righteousness, the creature and
   its felicity. (Prov. xvi. 4; Psalm. xi. 7; John iii. 16; Wisdom xi.
   24-26.) HATRED is an affection of separation in God, the object of
   which are the unrighteousness and misery of the creature. (Psalm v. 5;
   Ezek. xxv. 11; Deut. xxv. 15, 16, &c.; Isa. i. 24) But since God
   primarily loves himself and the good of justice, and at the same moment
   hates iniquity; and since He loves the creature and its happiness only
   secondarily, and at the same moment dislikes the misery of the
   creature; (Psalm xi. 5; Deut. xxviii. 63;) hence it comes to pass, that
   he hates a creature that pertinaciously perseveres in unrighteousness,
   and He loves its misery. (Isa. lxvi. 4.)

   LXVIII. Goodness in God is an affection of communicating his own good.
   (Rev. iv. 11; Gen. i. 31.) Its first object outwards is nothing; and
   thus necessarily the first, that, on its removal, there can be no
   outward communication. The First advance of this goodness is towards
   the creature as it is a creature; the Second is towards the creature as
   it performs its duty, to communicate good to it beyond the remuneration
   promised. Both these procedures of the Divine goodness may
   appropriately receive the appellation of "Benignity." The Third advance
   is towards a creature that has sinned, and that has by such
   transgression rendered itself liable to misery. This advance is called
   Mercy, that is, an affection for affording succour to a person in
   misery, sin itself presenting no obstacle to its exercise. (Rom. v. 8;
   Ezek. xvi. 6.) We attribute these advances to the Divine Goodness in
   such a manner, that in the mean time we concede to the love of God
   towards his creatures its portion in these advances.

   LXIX. Grace seems to stand as a proper adjunct to Goodness, and to Love
   towards the creatures. According to it, God is disposed to communicate
   his own good, and to love the creatures, not of merit or of debt, nor
   that it may add anything to God himself; (Psalm xvi. 2;) but that it
   may be well with him on whom the good is bestowed, and who is beloved.
   (Exod. xxxiv. 6; Rom. v. 8; 1 John iv. 7.)

   LXX. The affections which arise from the primary ones, [ 65,] are
   special, as being those which are not occupied about Good and Evil in
   common, but specially about Good as it is present or absent. We
   distinguish these affections according to the confined capacity of our
   consideration, as they have some analogy either in Concupiscibility or
   in Irascibility.

   LXXI. In the Concupiscible we consider, first, Desire and that which is
   opposed to it; and, afterwards, Joy and Grief. We describe Desire, in
   God, as an affection for obtaining the works of righteousness which
   have been prescribed to creatures endued with understanding, and for
   bestowing on them "the recompense of reward:" (Psalm lxxxi. 13-16; v,
   3-5; Isa. xlviii. 18, 19.) To this is opposed that affection according
   to which God abhors the works of unrighteousness, and the omission of a
   remuneration. (Jer. v. 7, 9.) Joy is an affection arising from the
   presence of a thing that is suitable: such as the fruition of himself,
   the obedience of the creature, the communication of his own goodness,
   and the destruction of his rebels and enemies. (Isa. lxii. 5; Psalm
   lxxxi. 13; Prov. i. 24-26.) Grief, which is its opposite, has its
   origin in the disobedience and the misery of the creature, and in the
   occasion given by his people for blaspheming the name of God among the
   Gentiles. Nearly allied to this is Repentance, which, in God, is
   nothing more than a change of the thing willed or done, on account of
   the act of a rational creature. (Gen. xv. 6; Jer. xviii. 8-10.)

   LXXII. In the Irascible we place Hope, and its opposite, Despair,
   Confidence and Anger, and we do not exclude even Fear, which, by an
   Anthropo-pathy, we read, as attributed to God. (Deut. xxxii. 27.) Hope
   is an attentive expectation of a good work due from the creature, and
   by the grace of God capable of being performed. It may easily be
   reconciled with the certain fore-knowledge of God. (Isa. v. 4; Luke
   xiii. 6, 7.) Despair arises from the pertinacious wickedness of the
   creature, who is "alienated from the life of God," and hardened in
   evil, and who, after "he is past feeling," his conscience having been
   "seared with a hot iron," has "given himself over unto lasciviousness,
   to work all uncleanness with greediness." (Jer. xiii. 23; Ephes. iv.
   18, 19.) What in God we call Confidence or Courage, is that by which He
   with great animation prosecutes a good that is beloved and desired, and
   puts away and repulses an evil that is hated. Anger is an affection of
   depulsion in God, through the punishment of the creature who has
   transgressed his law; by which He brings upon the creature the evil of
   misery for his unrighteousness, and takes the vengeance which is due to
   Himself, as an indication of his love of righteousness and his hatred
   of sin. When this is vehement, it is called "Fury." (Isa. lxiii. 3-5;
   Ezek. xiii. 13, 14; Isa. xxvii. 4; Jer. ix. 9; Deut. xxxii. 35; Jer. x.
   24; 12, 13; Isa. lxiii. 6.)

   LXXIII. We attribute these affections to God, on account of some of his
   own which are analogous to them, without any passion, as He is simple
   and immutable; and without any inordinateness, disorder and repugnance
   to right reason; for He exercises himself in a holy manner about all
   things which are the objects of his will. But we subject the use and
   exercise of them to the infinite wisdom of God, whose office it is
   previously to affix to each its object, mode, end, and circumstances,
   and to determine to which of them, in preference to the rest, is to be
   conceded the province of acting. (Exod. xxxii. 10-14; Deut. xxxii. 26,
   27.)

   LXXIV. Those things in God which have an analogy to moral virtues, as
   moderators of these affections, are partly general to all the
   affections, as Righteousness; and partly concern some of them in a
   special manner, as Patience, and those which are moderators of Anger
   and of the punishments which proceed from Anger.

   LXXV. Righteousness or Justice in God, is an eternal and constant will
   to render to every one his own: (Psalm xi. 7) To God himself that which
   is his, and to the creature what belongs to it. We consider this
   righteousness in its Words and in its Acts. In all its Words are found
   veracity and constancy; and in its Promises, fidelity. (2 Tim. ii. 13;
   Num. xxiii. 19; Rom. iii. 4; 1 Thess. v. 24) With regard to its Acts,
   it is two-fold, Disposing and Remunerative. The former is that
   according to which God disposes all the things in his actions through
   his own wisdom, according to the rule of equity which has either been
   prescribed or pointed out by his wisdom. The latter, [remunerative
   righteousness,] is that by which God renders to his creatures that
   which belongs to it, according to his work through an agreement into
   which He has entered with it. (Heb. vi. 10, 17, 18; Psalm cxlv. 17; 2
   Thess. i. 6; Rev. ii. 23.)

   LXXVI. Patience is that by which God patiently endures the absence of a
   good that is loved, desired, and hoped for, and the presence of an evil
   that is hated; and which spares sinners, not only that He may through
   them execute the judicial acts of his mercy and justice, but that he
   may likewise lead them to repentance; or may punish with the greater
   equity and more grievously, the contumacious. (Isa. v. 4; Ezek. xviii.
   23; Matt. xxi. 33- 41; Luke xiii. 6-9; Rom. ii. 4, 5; 2 Pet. iii. 9.)

   LXXVII. Long-suffering, gentleness, readiness to pardon, and clemency,
   are the moderators of Anger and Punishments. Long-Suffering suspends
   anger, lest it should hasten to drive away the evil as soon as ever
   such an act was required by the demerits of the creature. (Exod. xxxiv.
   6; Isa. xlviii. 8, 9; Psalm ciii. 9.) We call that Gentleness, or
   Lenity, which attempers Anger, lest it should be of too great a
   magnitude; nay, lest its severity should correspond with the magnitude
   of the wickedness committed. (Psalm ciii. 10.) We call that Readiness
   To Pardon, which moderates Anger, so that it may not continue forever,
   agreeably to the deserts of sinners. (Psalm xxx. 5; Jer. iii. 5; Joel
   ii. 13.) Clemency is that by which God attempers the deserved
   punishments, that by their severity and continuance they may be far
   inferior to the demerits of sin, and may not exceed the strength of the
   creature. (2 Sam. vii. 14; Psalm ciii. 13, 14.)

   ON THE POWER OF GOD

   LXXVIII. By the term "The Power Of God," is meant not a passive power,
   which cannot happen to God who is a pure act; nor the act, by which God
   is always acting in himself through necessity of nature; but it
   signifies an active power, by which He can operate extrinsically, and
   by which he does so operate when it seems good to himself.

   LXXIX. We describe it thus: "It is a faculty of the Life of God,
   posterior in order to the Understanding and the Will, by which God can,
   from the liberty of his own Will, operate extrinsically all things
   whatsoever that He can freely will, and by which he does whatsoever He
   freely wills." Hence it appears, that Power resembles a principle which
   executes what the will commands under the direction of knowledge. But
   we wish Impeding or Obstruction to be comprehended under the operation.
   (Psalm cxv. 3; Lament. iii. 37, 38; Psalm xxxiii. 9; Jer. xviii. 6.)
   Therefore, From this we exclude the power or capability of generating
   and breathing forth, because it acts in a natural manner and
   intrinsically.

   LXXX. The measure of the Divine Capability is the Free Will of God, and
   indeed this is an adequate measure. (Psalm cxv. 3; Matt. xi. 25-27) For
   whatsoever God can will freely, He can likewise do it; and whatsoever
   it is possible for Him to do, He can freely will it; and whatever it is
   impossible for Him to will, He cannot do it; and that which He cannot
   do, He also cannot will. But He does, because He wills; and He does not
   do, because He does not will. Therefore, He does the things which He
   does, because He wills so to do. He does them not, because He wills
   them not; not, on the contrary. Hence the objects of the Divine
   Capability may be most commodiously, and indeed ought to be,
   circumscribed through the object of the Free Will of God.

   LXXXI. The following is the manner: Since the Free Will [of God] rests
   upon a Will conducting itself according to the mode of [his] nature,
   and both of them have an Understanding which precedes them, and which,
   in conjunction with the Will, has the very Essence of God for its
   foundation; and since God can freely will those things alone which are
   not contrary to his Essence and Natural Will, and which can be
   comprehended in his Understanding as entities and true things: it
   follows, that He can do these things alone; nay, that He can likewise
   do all things, since the Free Will of God, and therefore, his Power
   also, are bound by those alone. And since things of this kind are the
   only things which are simply and absolutely possible, all other things
   being impossible, God is deservedly said to be capable of doing all
   things that are possible. (Luke i. 37; xviii, 27; Mark xiv. 36.) For
   how can there be an entity, a truth, or a good, which is contrary to
   His Essence and Natural Will, and incomprehensible to his
   Understanding?

   LXXXII. The things thus laid down [as described in the last clause of
   the preceding Thesis] are indeed confessed by all men; and they are
   generally described in the schools as things impossible, which imply a
   contradiction. But it is asked in species, "What are those things?" We
   will here recount some of them. God cannot make another God; is
   incapable of being changed; (James i. 17;) he cannot sin; (Psalm v. 5;)
   cannot lie; (Num. xxiii. 19; 2 Tim. ii. 13;) cannot cause a thing at
   the same time to be and not to be, to have been and not to have been,
   to be hereafter and not hereafter to be, to be this and not to be this,
   to be this and its contrary. He cannot cause an accident to be without
   its subject, a substance to be changed into a pre-existing substance,
   bread into the body of Christ, and He cannot cause a body to be in
   every place. When we make such assertions as these, we do not inflict
   an injury on the power of God; but we must beware that things unworthy
   of Him be not attributed to his Essence, his Understanding, and his
   Will.

   LXXXIII. The Power of God is infinite; because it can do not only all
   things possible; (which are innumerable, so that they cannot be
   reckoned to be such a number, without a possibility of their being
   still more;) but likewise because nothing can resist it. For all
   created things depend upon the Divine Power, as upon their efficient
   principle, as the. phrase is, both in their being and in their
   preservation; whence Omnipotence is deservedly attributed to Him. (Rev.
   i. 8; Ephes. iii. 20; Matt. iii. 9; xxvi, 53; Rom. ix. 19; Phil. iii.
   21.)

   Since the measure of God's Power is his own Free Will, and since
   therefore God does anything because he wills to do it; it cannot be
   concluded from the Omnipotence of God that anything will come to pass,
   [or will afterwards be,] unless it be evident from the Divine Will.
   (Dan. iii. 17, 18; Rom. iv. 20, 21; Matt. viii. 2.) But if this be
   evident from the will of God, what He hath willed to do is certain to
   be done, although, to the mind of the creature, it may not seem
   possible. (Luke i. 19, 20, 34-37.) And that the mind must be "brought
   into captivity to the obedience of faith," is a truth which here finds
   abundant scope for exercise.

   LXXXV. The distinction of Power into absolute, and ordinary or actual,
   has not reference to God's Power so much as to his Will, which uses his
   Power to do some things when it wills to use it, and which does not use
   it when it does not will; though it would be possible for it to use the
   Power if it would; and if it did use it, the Divine Will would, through
   it, do far more things than it does. (Matt. iii. 9.)

   LXXXVI. The Omnipotence of God cannot be communicated to any creature.
   (1 Tim. vi. 15; Jude. 4.)

   ON THE PERFECTION OF GOD

   LXXXVII. From the simple and infinite combination of all these things,
   when they are considered with the mode of pre-eminence, the Perfection
   of God has its existence. Not that by which He has every single thing
   in a manner the most perfect; for this is effected by Simplicity and
   Infinity: but it is that by which, in the most perfect manner, he has
   all things which denote any perfection. And it may fitly be described
   thus: "It is the interminable, the entire, and, at the same time, the
   perfect possession of Essence and Life." (Matt. v. 48; Gen. xvii. 1;
   Exod. vi. 3; Psalm l:10; Acts xvii. 25; James i. 17.)

   LXXXVIII. This Perfection of God infinitely exceeds the perfection of
   all the creatures, on a three-fold account. For it possesses all things
   in a mode the most perfect, and does not derive them from another. But
   the perfection which the creatures possess, they derive from God, and
   it is faintly shadowed forth after its archetype. Some creatures have a
   larger portion [of this derived perfection] than others; and the more
   of it they possess, the nearer they are to God and have the greater
   likeness to Him. (Rom. xi. 35, 36; 1 Cor. iv. 7; Acts xvii. 28, 29; 2
   Cor. iii. 18; 2 Pet. i. 4; Matt. v. 48.)

   LXXXIX. From this Perfection, by means of some internal act of God, his
   Blessedness has its existence; and his Glory exists, by means of some
   relation of it extrinsically. (1 Tim. i. 11; vi, 15; Exod. xxxiii. 18.)

   ON THE BLESSEDNESS OF GOD

   XC. Blessedness is through an act of the understanding: is it not also
   through an act of the will? Such is our opinion; and we delineate it
   thus. It is an act of the life of God, by which he enjoys his own
   perfection, that is fully known by his Understanding and supremely
   loved by his Will; and by which He complacently reposes in this
   Perfection with satisfaction. (Gen. xvii. 1; Psalm xvi. 11; 1 Cor. ii.
   9, 10.)

   XCI. The Blessedness of God is so peculiar to himself, that it cannot
   be communicated to a creature. (1 Cor. xv. 28.) Yet, in relation to the
   object, he is the beautifying good of all creatures endued with
   understanding, and is the Effector of the act which tends to this
   object, and which reposes with satisfaction in it. In these consists
   the blessedness of the creature.

   THE GLORY OF GOD

   XCII. The Glory of God is from his Perfection, regarded extrinsically,
   and may in some degree be described thus: It is the excellence of God
   above all things. God makes this glory manifest by external acts in
   various ways. (Rom. i. 23; ix, 4; Psalm viii. 1.)

   XCIII. But the modes of manifestation, which are declared to us in the
   scriptures, are chiefly two: the one, by an effulgence of light and of
   unusual splendour, or by its opposite, a dense darkness or obscurity.
   (Matt. xvii. 2-5; Luke ii. 9; Exod. xvi. 10; 1 Kings viii. 11.) The
   other, by the production of works which agree with his Perfection and
   Excellence. (Psalm xix. 1; John ii. 11.) But ceasing from any more
   prolix discussion of this subject, let us with ardent prayers
   suppliantly beseech the God of Glory, that, since He has formed us for
   his Glory, He would vouchsafe to make us yet more and more the
   instruments of illustrating his Glory among men, through Jesus Christ
   our Lord, the brightness of his Glory, and the express image of his
   Person.
     __________________________________________________________________

  DISPUTATION 5

  ON THE PERSON OF THE FATHER AND THE SON

  RESPONDENT: PETER DE LA FITE

   I. WE do not here receive the name of "Father," as it is sometimes
   taken in the Scriptures in regard to the adoption, according to which
   God hath adopted believers to himself as sons: (Gal. iv. 6) Nor with
   respect to the creation of things, according to which even the Gentiles
   themselves knew God the Father, and gave Him that appellation: (Acts
   xvii. 28.) But by this name we signify God according to the relation
   which He has to his only-begotten and proper Son, who is our Lord Jesus
   Christ: (Ephes. i. 3) And we thus describe Him: "He is the First Person
   in the Sacred Trinity, who from all eternity of himself begat his Word,
   which is his Son, by communicating to Him his own Divinity."

   II. We call Him "a Person," not in reference to the use of that word in
   personating, [appearing in a mask,] which denotes the representation of
   another; but in reference to its being defined an undivided and
   communicable subsistence, of a nature that is living, intelligent,
   willing, powerful, and active. Each of these properties is attributed,
   in the Holy Scriptures, to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
   Substitence: "Him which is, and which was, and which is to come." (Rev.
   i. 4) Life: "As the living Father hath sent me," &c. (John vi. 53, 57.)
   Intelligence: "O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and
   knowledge of God (Rom. xi. 33.) Will: "And this is the Father's will,"
   &c. (John vi. 39.) Power: "Thine, O Fath er, is the Power." (Matt. vi.
   13.) Action: "My Father worketh hitherto." (John v. 17.) We do not
   contend about words. Under the term "Person," we comprehend such things
   as we have now described; and since they agree with the Father, the
   title of "Person" cannot be justly denied to him.

   III. We call Him "a Person in the Holy Trinity," that is, a Divine
   Person, which with us possesses just as much force as if we were to
   call Him God. For though the Deity of the Father has been acknowledged
   by most of those persons who have called in question that of the Son;
   yet it is denied by those who have declared, that the God of the Old
   Testament is different from that of the New, and who have affirmed that
   the Father of Jesus Christ is a different Being from the Creator of
   heaven and earth. To the former class we oppose the word of Christ: "I
   thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth," &c. (Matt. xi. 25.) To
   the latter we oppose another saying of the same Christ: "It is my
   Father that honoureth me; of whom ye say, that He is your God." (John
   viii. 54.) To both of these classes together we oppose that joint
   declaration of the whole church at Jerusalem: "Thou art God, which hast
   made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and all that in them is: Who by
   the mouth of thy servant David hast said," &c. And in a subsequent
   verse, "For of a truth against thy holy Son Jesus, whom thou hast
   anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, etc, were gathered together."
   (Acts iv. 24-27.)

   IV. We place Him "first" in the Holy Trinity: for so hath Christ taught
   us, by commanding us to "baptize in the name of the Father, and of the
   Son, and of the Holy Ghost." (Matt. xxviii. 19.) "The First" not in
   relation of time but of order; which order has its foundation in this:
   The Father is the fountain and origin of the whole Divinity, and the
   principle and the cause of the Son himself, which the word the"
   implies. (John v. 26, 27.) Pious Antiquity attempted to illustrate this
   [mystery] by the similitude of a fountain and its stream, of the sun
   and its beam, of the mind and its reason, of a root and its stalk, and
   by similar comparisons. On this account the Father is called
   "unbegotten" and the Christian Fathers ascribe to Him supreme and
   pre-eminent authority. It is on this account also that the name of God
   is often attributed in the Scriptures peculiarly and by way of eminence
   to the Father.

   V. We attribute to Him "active generation," which likewise comprised
   under the word "Father;" but of its mode and ratio, we willingly
   confess ourselves to be ignorant. But yet, since all generation,
   properly so called, is made by the communication of the same nature
   which He possesses who begets, we say with correctness that "the Father
   of himself begat the Son," by communicating to him his Deity, which is
   his own nature. The principle, therefore, which begets, is the Father;
   but the principle by which generation is effected is his nature. Whence
   the Person is said to beget and to be begotten. But the nature is said
   neither to beget nor to be begotten, but to be communicated. This
   communication, when rightly understood, renders vain the objection of
   the Anti-Trinitarians, who accuse the members of the church universal
   of holding a quaternity (of Divine Persons in the Godhead.)

   VI. We say "that from all eternity He begat," because neither was he
   the God of Jesus Christ, before he was his father, nor was he simply
   God before he was his Father. For as we cannot imagine a mind that is
   devoid of reason, so we say that it is impious to form a conception in
   our minds of a God who is without his word. (John i. 1, 2.) Besides,
   according to the sentiments of sacred antiquity, and of the church
   universal, since this generation is an internal operation and it is
   likewise from all eternity. For all such operations are eternal, unless
   we wish to maintain that God is liable to change.

   VII. We have hitherto treated of the Father. The Son is the second
   person in the Holy Trinity, the Word of the Father, begotten of the
   Father from all eternity, and proceeding from Him by the communication
   of the same Deity which the Father possesses without origination.
   (Matt. xxviii. 19; John i. 1; Micah v. 2.) We say, "that he is not the
   Son by creation." For what things soever they were that have been
   created, they were all created by him. (John i. 3.) And "that he was
   not made the Son by adoption:" for we are all adopted in him. (John i.
   12; Ephes. i. 5, 6.) But "that he proceeded from the Father by
   generation." He is the Son, not by creation out of nonentities, or from
   uncreated elements--not by adoption, as though he had previously been
   some other thing than the Son; for this is his primitive name, and
   significant of his inmost nature; but He is by generation, and, as the
   Son, he is by nature a partaker of the whole divinity of his Father.

   VIII. We call the Son "a person," with the same meaning attached to the
   word as that by which we have already ( 2) predicated the Father. For
   he is an undivided and incommunicable subsistence. John says, (i, 1,)
   "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God." Of a living
   nature: "As I live by the Father." (John vi. 57.) Intelligent: "The
   Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, has declared him." (John i.
   18.) Willing: "To whomsoever the Son will reveal him." (Matt. xi. 27.)
   "Even so the Son quickeneth whom he will." (John v. 21.) Powerful:
   "According to the efficacy whereby He is able even to subdue all things
   unto him." (Phil. iii. 21.) Active: "And I work." (John v. 17.)

   IX. We call the Son "a person in the Sacred Trinity," that is, a Divine
   person and God. And, with orthodox antiquity, we prove our affirmation
   by four distinct classes or arguments. (1.) From the names by which he
   is called in the Scriptures. (2.) From the divine attributes which the
   Scriptures ascribe to him. (3.) From the works which the Scriptures
   relate to have been produced by him. (4.) From a collation of those
   passages of Scripture, which, having been uttered in the Old Testament
   concerning the Father, are in the New appropriated to the Son.

   X. The divinity of the person of the Son is evident, from the names
   which are attributed to him in the scriptures. (1.) Because he is
   called God, and this not only attributively, as "the Word was God,"
   (John i. 1.) "Who is over all, God blessed forever;" (Rom. ix. 5;) but
   likewise subjectively: "God manifested in the flesh." (1 Tim. iii. 16.)
   "O God, thy God hath anointed Thee with the oil of gladness." (Heb. i.
   9.) Nay, he is likewise called "the great God." (Tit. ii, 13.) (2.) The
   word "Son" stands in proof of the same truth, especially so far as this
   name belongs to him properly and solely, according to which he is
   called "God's own Son," (Rom. viii. 32,) and "his only begotten Son,"
   (John i. 18,) which expressions, we affirm, are tantamount to his being
   called by nature, the Son of God. (3.) Because he is called "King of
   kings and Lord of lords;" (Rev. xvii. 14; xix, 16;) and "the Lord of
   glory." (1 Cor. ii. 8.) These appellations prove much more strongly
   what we wish to establish, if they be compared with the scriptures of
   the Old Testament, in which the same names are ascribed to him who is
   called Jehovah. (Psalm xcv. 3; xxiv, 8-10.) (4.) Pious antiquitity
   established the same truth from the name, of Logov, "the Word;" which
   cannot signify the outward word that is devoid of a proper subsistence,
   on account of those things which are attributed to it in the
   Scriptures. For it is said to have been "in the beginning, to have been
   with God, and to be God," and to have "created all things," &c.

   XI. The essential attributes of the Deity which are in the Scriptures
   ascribed to the Son of God, likewise declare this in the plainest
   manner. (1.) Immensity: "My Father and I will come unto him, and make
   our abode with him." (John xiv. 23.) "That Christ may dwell in your
   hearts by faith." (Ephes. iii. 17.) "I am with you alway, even unto the
   end of the world." (Matt. xxviii. 20.) (2.) Eternity: "In the beginning
   was the Word." (John i. 1.) "I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the
   last." (Rev. i. 11; ii, 8.) (3.) Immutability: "But thou, O Lord,
   remainest; thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail." (Heb. i.
   11, 12.) (4.) Omniscience is also attributed to him: For he searches
   the reins and hearts;" (Rev. ii. 93.) He "knows all things." (John xxi.
   17.) And he perceived the thoughts of the Pharisees. (Matt. xii. 25.)
   (5.) Omnipotence:

   "According to the efficacy whereby the Lord Jesus Christ is able even
   to subdue all things unto himself" (Phil. iii. 21.) But the Divine
   nature cannot, without a contradiction, be taken away from him to whom
   the proper essentials of God are ascribed. (6.) Lastly. Majesty and
   glory belong to Him equally with the Father: "That all men should
   honour the Son, even as they honour the Father." (John v. 23.)
   "Blessing, and honour, and glory, and power, be unto Him that sitteth
   upon the throne, and unto the Lamb, forever and ever." (Rev. v. 13.)

   XII. The divine works which are attributed to Him, establish the same
   truth. (1.) The creation of all things: "A2 things were made by Him."
   (John i. 3.) "By whom also, he made the worlds," or the ages. (Heb. i.
   2.) "One Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things." (1 Cor. viii. 6.)
   But what are these "all things?" Exactly the same as those which are
   said, in the same verse, to be "of the Father." (2.) The preservation
   of all things: all things by the word of his power." (Heb. i. 3.) "My
   Father worketh hitherto, and I work." (John v. 17.) (3.) The performing
   of miracles: "Which He works by the Holy Spirit, who is said to "have
   received of the things of Christ, by which he will glorify Christ."
   (John xvi. 14.) "By which, also, he went and preached unto the spirits
   in prison." (1 Pet. iii. 19.) This Spirit is so peculiar to Christ,
   that the Apostles are said to perform miracles in the name and power of
   Christ. (4.) To these let the works which relate to the salvation of
   the church be added; which cannot be performed by one who is a mere
   man.

   XIII. A comparison of those passages which in the Old Testament, are
   ascribed to God, who claims for himself the appellation of Jehovah,
   with the same passages which in the New, are attributed to the Son of
   God, our Lord Jesus Christ supplies to us the fourth class of
   arguments. But because the number of them is immense, we will refrain
   from a prolix recital of the whole, and produce only a few out of the
   many. In Numbers. xxi. 5-7, it is said, "The people spoke against God,
   and the Load sent fiery serpents among them, and they bit the people,"
   many of whom "died." In 1 Corinthians x. 9, the apostle says, "Neither
   let us tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted, and were destroyed
   of serpents." The passage in the 68th Psalm, (18,) which describes God
   as "ascending on high and leading captivity captive," is interpreted by
   the apostle, (Ephes. iv. 8,) and applied to Christ. What is spoken in
   Psalm cii. 25, 26, about the true God, ["Of old hast thou laid the
   foundation of the earth," &c.] is, in Heb. i. 10-12, expressly applied
   to Christ. St. John, in his gospel, (xii, 40, 41,) interprets the
   vision described by Isaiah, (vi, 9, 10,) and declares that "Esaias said
   these things when he saw the glory of Christ." In Isai. viii. 14,
   Jehovah, it is said, "shall be a rock of offense, and a snare to the
   houses of Israel," &c. Yet Simeon, (in Luke ii. 34,) St. Paul, (in
   Romans ix. 33,) and St. Peter, (1 Epis. ii. 8,) severally declare that
   Christ was "set for the rising and falling of many," for "a stumbling
   block, and rock of offense" to unbelievers, and to "the disobedient."

   XIV. We call Christ "the second person," according to the order which
   has been pointed out to us by Himself in Matt. xxviii. 19. For the Son
   is of the Father, as from one from whom he is said to have come forth.
   The Son lives by the Father, (John vi. 57,) and the Father hath given
   to the Son to have life in himself." (v, 26.) The Son understands by
   the Father, because "the Father sheweth the Son all things that himself
   doeth," (v, 20,) and what things the Son saw while "He was in the bosom
   of the Father, he testifies and declares to us." (i, 18; iii, 32.) The
   son works from the Father, because "the Son can do nothing of himself:
   But what he seeth the Father do." (v, 19.) Thus "the Son does not speak
   of himself, but the Father, that dwelleth in him, doeth the works."
   (xiv, 10.) This is the reason why the Son, by a just right, refers all
   things to the Father, as to Him from whom he received all that he had.
   (xix, 11; xvii, 7.) "When he was in the form of God, he thought it not
   robbery to be equal with God; but made himself of no reputation, and
   took upon him the form of a servant, &c. and became obedient" to the
   Father, "even unto the death of the cross." (Phil. ii. 6-8.)

   XV. We say "that the Son was begotten of the Father from all eternity."
   (1.) Because "his goings-forth have been from of old, from
   everlasting," and "these goings-forth" are from the Father. (Micah v.
   2, 3.) If any one be desirous to give them any other interpretation
   than "the goings-forth" of generation, he must make them subsequent to
   the "goings-forth" of generation; and thus likewise he establishes the
   eternity of generation. (2.) Because, since the Son is eternal, as we
   have previously shewn, [ 7,] and since he had no existence at all
   before he existed as the Son, (but it is proper to a son to be
   begotten,) we correctly assert on these grounds, that "he was eternally
   begotten." (3.) Since Logov, "the Word," was "in the beginning with the
   Father," (John i. 1, 9,) he must of necessity have been in the
   beginning from the Father; (unless we wish to maintain that the Word is
   collateral with the Father;) in truth, according to the order of nature
   he must have been from the Father, before he was with the Father. But
   he is not from the Father, except according to the mode of generation;
   for if it be otherwise, "the Word" will be from the Father in one mode,
   and "the Son" in another, which contradicts the eternity of the Son
   that we have already established. Therefore, "the Word" is eternally
   begotten.

   XVI. From these positions we perceive, that an agreement and a
   distinction subsists between the Father and the Son. (l.) An Agreement
   in reference to One and the same nature and essence, according to which
   the Son is said to be "in the form of God," and "equal with the
   Father;" (Phil. ii. 6,) and according to the decree of the Nicene
   Council to be omoousiov ["of the same substance,"] "consubstantial with
   the Father," not omoiousiov "of like substance;" because the comparison
   of things in essence must be referred not to similitude or
   dissimilitude, but to Equality or Inequality, according to the very
   nature of things and to truth itself: (2.) A Distinction according to
   the mode of existence or subsistence, by which both of them have their
   divinity: for the Father has it from no one, the Son has it
   communicated to him by the Father. According to the former, the Son is
   said to be one with the Father; (John x. 30;) according to the latter,
   He is said to be "another" than the Father; (v, 32;) but according to
   both of them, the Son and the Father are said to "come to those whom
   they love, and to make their abode with them," (xiv, 23,) by the Spirit
   of both Father and Son "who dwelleth in believers," (Rom. viii. 9-11,)
   and "whom the Son sends to them from the Father." (John xv. 26.) May
   the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of all consolation, deign
   to bestow upon us the communion of this Spirit, through the Son of his
   love. Amen!
     __________________________________________________________________

  DISPUTATION 6

  ON THE HOLY SPIRIT RESPONDENT: JAMES MAHOT

   As the preceding Disputation treated of God the Father and God the Son,
   order requires us now to enter on the subject of the Holy Ghost.

   I. The word Spirit signifies primarily, properly, and adequately, a
   thing which in its first act and essence is most subtle and simple, but
   which in its second act and efficacy is exceedingly active, that is,
   powerful and energetic. Hence it has come to pass, that this word is
   received, by way of distinction and opposition, sometimes for a
   personal and self-existing energy and power, and sometimes for an
   energy inhering to some other thing according to the mode of quality or
   property: but this word belongs primarily and properly to a
   self-existing power; and to an inhering power or energy, only
   secondarily and by a metaphorical communication. (John iii. 8; Psalm
   civ. 4; Luke i. 35;1 Kings ii. 9.)

   II. But it is, in the first place, and with the greatest truth,
   ascribed to God, (John iv. 24,) both because He according to Essence is
   a pure and most simple act; and because according to Efficacy he is
   most active, and most prompt and powerful to perform, that is, because
   He is the first and Supreme Being, as well as the first and Supreme
   Agent. But it is with singular propriety attributed to the hypostatical
   energy which exists in God, and which is frequently marked with an
   addition, thus, "The Spirit of Elohim," (Gen. i. 9,) "The Spirit of
   Jehovah," (Isa. xi. 2,) and "His Holy Spirit." (lxiii, 10.) By these
   expressions is signified, that He is the person by whom God the Father
   and the Son perform all things in heaven and earth, (Matt. xii. 28;
   Luke xi. 20,) and that He is not only Holy in himself, but likewise the
   Sanctifier of all things which are in any way holy and so called. Our
   present discourse is concerning the Holy Spirit understood according to
   this last signification.

   III. We may not attempt to define the Holy Spirit, (for such an attempt
   is unlawful,) but we may be allowed in some degree to describe Him
   according to the Scriptures, after the following manner: He is the
   person subsisting in the Sacred and undivided Trinity, who is the Third
   in order, emanates from the Father and is sent by the Son; and
   therefore He is the Spirit proceeding from both, and, according to his
   Person, distinct from both; an infinite, eternal illimitable Spirit,
   and of the same Divinity with God the Father and the Son. This
   description we will now consider in order, according to its several
   parts. (Matt. xxviii. 19; John i. 26; and Luke iii. 16; John xiv. 16; 1
   Cor. ii. 10, 11; Gen. i. 2; Psalm cxxxix. 7-12.)

   IV. On this subject four things come under our consideration and must
   be established by valid arguments. (1.) That the Holy Spirit ufisamenon
   is subsistent and a Person; not something after the manner of a quality
   and property, (suppose that of goodness, mercy, or patience,) which
   exists within the Deity. (2.) That He is a Person proceeding from the
   Father and the Son, and therefore is in order the Third in the Trinity.
   (3.) That according to his Person He is distinct from the Father and
   the Son. (4.) That He is infinite, eternal, immeasurable, and of the
   same Divinity with the Father and the Son, that is, not a creature, but
   God.

   V. The first is proved by those attributes which the whole of mankind
   are accustomed to ascribe to a thing that has an existence, and which
   they conceive under the notion of "a Person:" for we assert, that all
   those things belong to the Holy Spirit, whether they agree with a
   person in the first Act or in the second. (1.) From those things which
   agree in the first Act with a thing that has an existence and is a
   Person, we draw the following conclusion: That to which belongs Essence
   or Existence, Life, Understanding, Will and Power, is justly called "a
   Person," or nothing whatever in the nature of things can receive that
   appellation. But to the Holy Spirit belong: (i.) Essence or Existence:
   for He is in God, (1 Cor. ii. 11,) emanates from God and is sent by the
   Son. (John xv. 26.) (ii.) Life: for He "brooded over the waters," (Gen.
   i. 2,) as a hen covers her chickens with her wings; and He is the
   Author of animal and of spiritual life to all things living. (Job
   xxxiii. 4; John iii. 5; Rom. viii. 2, 11.) (iii.) Understanding: "The
   Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God." (1 Cor. ii.
   10.) (iv.) Will: for He "distributes his gifts to every man severally
   as He will." (1 Cor. xii. 11.) (v.) Lastly, Power: with which, the
   prophets, and other holy persons, and in particular the Messiah
   himself, were furnished and strengthened. (Micah iii. 8; Ephes. iii.
   16; Isa. xi. 2.)

   VI. The same thing is proved (2.) from those things which are usually
   attributed to a Person in the second Act. For of this description are
   the actions which are ascribed to the Holy Spirit, and which usually
   belong to nothing except a subsistence and a person. Such are to
   create, (Job xxxiii. 4; Psalm civ. 30,) to preserve, to vivify or
   quicken, to instruct or furnish them with knowledge, faith, charity,
   hope, the fear of the Lord, fortitude, patience, and other virtues; to
   "rush mightily upon Sampson;" (Judges xiv. 6;) to "depart from Saul;"
   (1 Sam. xvi. 14;) to "rest upon the Messiah;" (Isa. xi. 2;) to "come
   upon and overshadow Mary;" (Luke i. 35;) to send the prophets; (Isa.
   lxi. 1;) to appoint bishops; (Acts xx. 28;) to descend in a bodily
   appearance like a dove upon Christ, (Luke iii. 22,) and similar
   operations. To these may also be added those metaphorical expressions
   which attributes such passions to Him as agree with no other thing than
   a subsistence and a person, and as are signified in the following
   passages: "I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh." (Joel ii. 28.)
   "Jesus breathed on them, and said, receive ye the Holy Ghost." (John
   xx. 22.) "They vexed his Holy Spirit. (Isa. lxiii. 10.) "Grieve not the
   Holy Spirit of God." Ephes. iv. 30.) To blaspheme and speak a word
   against the Holy Ghost. (Matt. xii. 31, 32.) "He hath done despite to
   the Spirit of Grace," (Heb. x. 29.)

   VII. A similar bearing have those passages of Scripture which reckon
   the Holy Spirit in the same series with the Father and the Son. Of
   which class is that commanding men "to be baptized in the name of the
   Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost;" (Matt. xxviii. 19;) that
   which says, "There are three that bear record in Heaven, the Father,
   the Word, and the Holy Ghost." (1 John v. 7;) that which declares, "The
   same Spirit, the same Lord, and the same God, effect the diversities of
   operations, institute the differences of administrations, and pour out
   the diversities of gifts; (1 Cor. xii. 4 -- 6;) and that which
   beseeches, "that the grace of' the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of
   God, and the communion of the Holy Ghost may be with all believers." (2
   Cor. xiii. 13.) For it would be absurd to number an inly-existent
   quality, or property, in the same series with two subsistences or
   persons.

   VIII. The second topic of consideration [ 15,] contains three members:
   (i.) of which the first, that is, the procession of the Holy Spirit
   from the Father, is proved by those passages of Scripture in which he
   receives the appellation of "the Spirit of God and of the Father," and
   of "the Spirit who is of God;" and by those in which the Spirit is said
   to proceed and go forth from, to be given, poured out, and sent forth
   by the Father, and by whom the Father acts and operates. (John xiv. 16,
   26; xv, 26; Joel ii. 28; Gal. iv. 6.) (ii.) The second member, that is,
   the procession from the Son, is proved by similar passages, which style
   Him "the Spirit of the Son," (Gal. iv. 6,) and which declare, that He
   is given and sent by the Son, (John xv. 26,) and that He therefore
   receives from the Son and glorifies Him. (xvi, 14.) To which must
   likewise be added, from another passage, (xx, 22,) a mode of giving,
   which is called "breathing," or inspiration. (iii.) The third member,
   that is, His being the third person in the Holy Trinity in order, but
   not in time and degree, appears principally from the fact, that the
   Spirit of the Father and the Son is said to be sent and given by the
   Father and the Son, and that the Father and the Son are said to work by
   Him. It is also manifest from the order which was observed in the
   institution of Baptism, "Baptizing them in the name of the Father, and
   of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost." (Matt. xxviii. 19.)

   IX. All those passages of Scripture which have been produced in the
   preceding Theses for another purpose, prove "that the Holy Spirit is
   distinguished from the Father and the Son, not only according to name,
   but likewise according to person," which is the third part of the
   description which we have given. [ 4.] Among other passages, the
   following expressly affirm this distinction: "I will pray the Father,
   and He shall give you another Comforter." (John xiv. 16.) "That
   Comforter, the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name." (xiv,
   26.) "When that Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the
   Father." (xv, 26.) "The Spirit of the Lord Jehovah is upon me; because
   Jehovah hath annointed me," &c. (Isa. lxi. 1.) There are numerous other
   passages in confirmation of this distinction: so that the blindness of
   Sabellius was most wonderful, who could possibly be in darkness amidst
   such a splendour of daylight.

   X. Lastly. The fourth part comes now to be considered. (1.)

   The Infinity of the Holy Spirit is proved, both by his Omniscience, by
   which he is said to "search all things, yea, the deep things of God,"
   and to know all the things which are in God; (1 Cor. ii. 10, 11; John
   xvi. 13;) and by his Omnipotence, by which He hath created and still
   preserves all things, (Job. xxxiii. 4) and according to both of which
   He is styled "the Spirit of wisdom and of knowledge," and "the power of
   the Highest." (Luke i. 35.) (2.) His Eternity is established, (Isa. xi.
   2) both by the creation of all things; for whatsoever is before all
   things which have been made, that is eternal; and by the titles with
   which He is signalized, for he is called "the power of the Highest,"
   and the finger of God." (Luke xi. 20.) These titles cannot apply to a
   thing that has its beginning in time. (3.) A most luminous argument for
   His Immensity lies in this. It is said, that "no one can flee from the
   Spirit of God; (Psalm cxxxix. 7;) and that the Spirit of the Lord
   dwells in all his saints, as in a temple. (1 Cor. vi. 19.)

   XI. From all these particulars it clearly appears, that the Holy Ghost
   is of the same Divinity with the Father and the Son, and is truly
   distinguished by the name of God. For He who is not a creature, and yet
   has a real subsistence, must be God; and He who is from God, and who
   proceeds from the Father, not by an external emanation, nor by a
   creation performed through the intervention of any other Divine power,
   but by an internal emanation, He, being the power of God, by what right
   shall He be despoiled of the name of "God?" For when He is said to be
   given, poured out, and sent; this does not betoken any diminution of
   his Divinity, but is an intimation of his origin from God, of his
   procession from the Father and the Son, and of his mission to his
   office. A clear indication of his Deity is also apparent from its being
   said, that He also with plenary power distributes Divine gifts
   according to his own will, (1 Cor. xii. 11,) and he bestows his gifts
   with an authority equal to that with which "God" the Father is said to
   "work his operations," (4.) and to that with which the Son, who is
   called "the Lord," is said to "institute administrations."

   XII. This doctrine of the sacred and undivided Trinity contains a
   mystery which far surpasses every human and angelical understanding, if
   it be considered according to the internal union which subsists between
   the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and according to the relation
   among them of origin and procession. But if regard be had to that
   economy and dispensation by which the Father and the Son, and both of
   them through the Holy Spirit, accomplish our salvation; the
   contemplation is one of admirable sweetness, and produces in the hearts
   of believers the most exhuberant fruits of faith, hope, charity,
   confidence, fear, and obedience, to the praise of God the Creator, the
   Son the Redeemer, and of the Holy Ghost the Sanctifier. May "the Love
   of God the Father, the Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the
   Communion of the Holy Ghost, be with us," and with all saints. Amen! (2
   Cor. xiii. 14.)

   "If the Spirit be third in dignity and order, what necessity is there
   for his being also the third in nature? Indeed the doctrine of piety
   has perhaps taught that He is third in dignity. But to employ the
   expression the third in nature,' we have neither learned out of the
   Holy Scriptures, nor is it possible to collect it as a consequence from
   what precedes. For as the Son is in truth Second in order, because He
   is from the Father, and Second in dignity, because the Father exists
   that He may be himself the principle and the cause, and because through
   the Son there is a procession and an access to God the Father; (but He
   is no more second in nature, because the Deity is one in both of them.)
   So, undoubtedly, is likewise the Holy Spirit, though He follows the Son
   both in order and dignity, as we completely grant, yet He is not at all
   resembling one who exists in the nature of another. Basilius Eversor 3.

   "In brief, in things to be distinguished, the Deity is incapable of
   being divided; and resembles one vast attempered mass of effulgence
   proceeding from three suns which mutually embrace each other. Wherefore
   when we have had regard to the Deity itself, or to the first cause, or
   to the monarchy, we have formed in our minds a conception of some one
   thing. Again, when I apply my mind to these things in which Deity
   consists, and which exist from the first cause itself, flowing from it
   with equal glory and without any relation to time, I discover three
   things as the objects of my adoration." Gregory Nazianzen, Orat. 3 De
   Theolog.
     __________________________________________________________________

  DISPUTATION 7

  ON THE FIRST SIN OF THE FIRST MAN

  RESPONDENT: ABRAHAM APPART

  THE USE OF THE DOCTRINE

   I. When an inquiry is instituted concerning this first evil, we do not
   agitate the question for the purpose of unworthily exposing to disgrace
   the nakedness of the first formed pair, which had been closely covered
   up, as impious Ham did in reference to his father. (Gen. ix. 22.) But
   we enter on this subject, that, after it is accurately known, as when
   the cause of a mortal disease is discovered, we may with the greater
   earnestness implore the hand which heals and cures. (Gal. ii. 16.) In
   this discussion four things seem to be principally entitled to a
   consideration. (1.) The sin itself. (2.) Its causes. (3.) Its
   heinousness. (4.) Its effects.

   THE SIN ITSELF

   II. This sin is most appropriately called by the Apostle,
   "disobedience," and "offense" or fall. (Rom. v. 18, 19. (1.).
   Disobedience; for, since the law against which the sin was committed,
   was symbolical, having been given to testify that man was under a law
   to God, and to prove his obedience, and since the subsequent
   performance of it was to be a confession of devoted submission and due
   obedience; the transgression of it cannot, in fact, be denoted by a
   more commodious name than that of "disobedience," which contains within
   itself the denial of subjection and the renunciation of obedience. (2.)
   Offense, or fall. Because as man, having been previously placed in a
   state of integrity, walked with unstumbling feet in the way of God's
   commandments; by this foul deed he impinged or offended against the law
   itself, and fell from his state of innocence. (Rom. v. 15-18.)

   III. This sin, therefore, is a transgression of the law which was
   delivered by God, to the first human beings, about not eating the fruit
   of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil; perpetrated by the free
   will of man, from a desire to be like God, and through the persuasion
   of Satan that assumed the shape of a serpent. On account of this
   transgression, man fell under the displeasure and the wrath of God,
   rendered himself subject to a double death, and deserving to be
   deprived of the primeval righteousness and holiness, in which a great
   part of the image of God consisted. (Gen. ii. 17; Rom. v. 19; Gen. iii.
   3-6, 23, 24; Rom. v. 12, 16; Luke xix. 26.)

   THE CAUSE OF THIS SIN

   IV. The efficient cause of this sin is two fold. The one immediate and
   near. The other remote and mediate. (1.) The former is Man himself,
   who, of his own free will and without any necessity either internal or
   external, (Gen. iii. 6,) transgressed the law which had been proposed
   to him, (Rom. v. 19,) which had been sanctioned by a threatening and a
   promise, (Gen. ii. 16, 17,) and which it was possible for him to have
   observed (ii, 9; iii, 23, 24.) (2.) The remote and mediate efficient
   cause is the Devil, who, envying the Divine glory and the salvation of
   mankind, solicited man to a transgression of that law. (John viii. 44.)
   The instrumental cause is the Serpent, whose tongue Satan abused, for
   proposing to man these arguments which he considered suitable to
   persuade him. (Gen. iii. 1; 2 Cor. xi. 3.) It is not improbable, that
   the grand deceiver made a conjecture from his own case; as he might
   himself have been enticed to the commission of sin by the same
   arguments. (Gen. iii. 4, 5.)

   V. Those arguments which may be called "both the inwardly moving" and
   "the outwardly-working causes," were two. (1.) The one, directly
   persuading, was deduced from a view of the advantage which man would
   obtain from it, that is, a likeness to God. (Gen. iii. 5, 6.) (2.) The
   other was a removing argument, one of dissuasion, taken from God's
   threatening; lest the fear of punishment, prevailing over the desire of
   a similitude to God, should hinder man from eating. (iii, 4.) Though
   the first of these two arguments occupies the first station, with
   regard to order, in the proposition; yet, we think, it obtained the
   last place with regard to efficiency. To these arguments may be added
   two qualities imparted by the Creator to the fruit of the tree,
   calculated blandly to affect and allure the senses of a human being;
   these qualities are intimated in the words, "that the tree was good for
   food, and that it was pleasant to the eyes." (iii, 6.) But there is
   this difference between the two principal arguments and these
   qualities. The former were proposed by the Devil to persuade to the
   commission of sin, as such; while the two qualities implanted by God
   were proposed only for the purpose of persuading [the woman] to eat, if
   that could have been done without sinning.

   VI. The inwardly-moving causes, but which became such by accident, were
   two. (1.) Such an affection, or desire, for a likeness to God, as had
   been implanted in man by God himself; but it was to be exercised in a
   certain order and method. For the gracious image and likeness of God,
   according to which man was created, tended towards his glorious image
   and likeness. (2 Cor. iii. 18.) (2.) A natural affection for the fruit
   which was good in its taste, pleasant in its aspect, and well adapted
   for preserving and recruiting animal life.

   VII. But as it was the duty of man to resist the efficacy of all and
   each of these several causes, so was it likewise in power; for he had
   been "created after the image of God," and therefore, in "the knowledge
   of God," (Gen. i. 27; Col. iii. 10,) and endued with righteousness and
   true holiness. (Ephes. iv. 24.) This resistance might have been
   effected by his repelling and rejecting the causes which operated
   outwardly, and by reducing into order and subjecting to the Law and to
   the Spirit of God those which, impelled inwardly. If he had acted thus,
   the temptation, out of which he would have departed victorious, would
   not have been imputed to him as an offense against the violated law.
   (Gen. iii. 7-12.)

   VIII. But the guilt of this sin can by no means be transferred to God,
   either as an efficient or as a deficient cause. (1.) Not as an
   efficient cause. For He neither perpetrated this crime through man, nor
   employed against man any action, either internal or external, by which
   he might incite him to sin. (Psalm v. 5; James i. 13.) (2.) Not as a
   deficient cause. For He neither denied nor withdrew any thing that was
   necessary for avoiding this sin and fulfilling the law; but He had
   endowed Him sufficiently with all things requisite for that purpose,
   and preserved him after he was thus endued.

   IX. But the Divine permission intervened; not as having permitted that
   act to man's legitimate right and power, that he might commit it
   without sin, for such a permission as this is contrary to legislation;
   (Gen. ii. 17;) but as having permitted it to the free will and
   capability of man. This Divine permission is not the denial or the
   withdrawing of the grace necessary and sufficient for fulfilling the
   law; (Isa. v. 4;) for if a permission of this kind were joined to
   legislation, it would ascribe the efficiency of sin to God. But it is
   the suspension of some efficiency, which is possible to God both
   according to right and to capability, and which, if exerted, would
   prevent sin in its actual commission. This is commonly called "an
   efficacious hindrance." But God was not bound to employ this
   impediment, when He had already laid down those hindrances to sin which
   might and ought to have withheld and deterred man from sinning, and
   which consisted in the communication of his own image, in the
   appointment of his law, in the threat of punishments, and in the
   promise of rewards.

   X. Though the cause of this permission may be reckoned in the number of
   those things which, such is the will of God, are hidden from us, (Deut.
   xxix. 29) yet, while with modesty and reverence we inspect the acts of
   God, it appears to us that a two-fold cause may be maintained, the one
   a priori, the other a posteriori. (1.) We will enunciate the former in
   the words of Tertullian. "If God had once allowed to man the free
   exercise of his own will and had duly granted this permission, He
   undoubtedly had permitted the enjoyment of these things through the
   very authority of the institution. But they were to be enjoyed as in
   Him, and according to Him; that is, according to God, that is, for
   good. For who will permit any thing against himself? But as in man
   [they were to be enjoyed] according to the motions of his liberty."
   (2.) The cause a posteriori shall be given in the words of St.
   Augustine. "A good being would not suffer evil to be done, unless He
   was likewise Omnipotent, and capable of bringing good out of that
   evil."

   XI. The material cause of this sin is the tasting of the fruit of the
   tree of the knowledge of good and evil, which is an act in its own
   nature indifferent, and easily avoidable by man in the midst of such
   abundant plenty of good and various fruits. From this shine forth the
   admirable benignity and kindness of God; whose will it was to have
   experience of the obedience of his creature, in an act which that
   creature could with the utmost facility omit, without injury to his
   nature, and even without any detriment to his pleasure. This seems to
   have been intimated by God himself when he propounded the precept in
   this manner. "Of every tree of the garden thou shalt freely eat; but of
   the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat." (Gen.
   ii. 16, 17.)

   XII. But the form of this sin is anomia "the transgression of the law,"
   (1 John iii. 4,) which belongs to this act in reference to its having
   been forbidden by the law. And because this relation adhered to the act
   from the time when God circumscribed it by a law, the effect of it was
   that the act ought to be omitted. (Dan. iii. 18.) For the moral evil,
   which adhered to it through the prohibition of God, was greater, than
   the natural good which was in the act by nature. There was also in man
   the image of God, according to which he ought to have been more
   abhorrent of that act because sin adhered to it, than to be inclined by
   a natural affection to the act itself, because some good was joined
   with it.

   XIII. No end can be assigned to this sin. For evil, of itself, has not
   an end, since an end has always reference to a good. But the acts of
   the end were, that man might obtain a likeness to God in the knowledge
   of good and evil, and that he might satisfy his senses of taste and
   seeing. (Gen. iii. 5, 6.) But he did not suppose, that he would gain
   this similitude by sin as such, but by an act as it was a natural one.
   It had the boundary which the Divine determination placed round about
   it, and which was two-fold. The one, agreeing with the nature of sin,
   according to the severity of God. The other, transcending sin, nay,
   contravening it, according to the grace and mercy of God. (Rom. ix. 22,
   23.)

   THE HEINOUSNESS OF THIS SIN

   XIV. From the particulars already discussed, some judgment may be
   formed of the heinousness of this sin, which seems principally to
   consist of these four things. (1) That it is the transgression of a law
   that is not peculiar [to one person, or only to a few,] but of a law
   which universally bears witness to the obligation of man towards God,
   and which is a test of his obedience. A contempt of this law has in it
   a renunciation of the covenant into which God has entered with man, and
   of the obedience which from that covenant is due to God. (Gen. xvii.
   14.) (2.) That man perpetrated this crime, after he had been placed in
   a state of innocence and adorned by God with such excellent endowments
   as those of "the knowledge of God," and "righteousness and true
   holiness." (Gen. i. 26, 27; Col. iii. 10; Ephes. iv. 24.) (3.) That
   when so many facilities existed for not sinning, especially in the act
   itself, yet man did not abstain from this sin. (Gen. ii. 16, 17,) (4.)
   That he committed this sin in a place that was sanctified as a type of
   the celestial Paradise. (ii, 15, 16; iii, 6, 23; Rev. ii. 7.) There are
   some other things which may aggravate this sin; but since it has them
   in common with most other offenses, we shall not at present enter into
   a discussion of them.

   THE EFFECTS OF THIS SIN

   XV. The proper and immediate effect of this sin was the offending of
   the Deity. For since the form of sin is "the transgression of the law,"
   (1 John iii. 4,) it primarily and immediately strikes against the
   legislator himself, (Gen. iii. 11,) and this with the offending of one
   whose express will it was that his law should not be offended. From
   this violation of his law, God conceives just displeasure, which is the
   second effect of sin. (iii, 16-19, 23, 24.) But to anger succeeds
   infliction of punishment, which was in this instance two-fold. (1.) A
   liability to two deaths. (ii, 17; Rom. vi. 23.) (2.) The withdrawing of
   that primitive righteousness and holiness, which, because they are the
   effects of the Holy Spirit dwelling in man, ought not to have remained
   in him after he had fallen from the favour of God, and had incurred the
   Divine displeasure. (Luke xix. 26.) For this Spirit is a seal of God's
   favour and good will. (Rom. viii. 14, 15; 1 Cor. ii. 12.)

   XVI. The whole of this sin, however, is not peculiar to our first
   parents, but is common to the entire race and to all their posterity,
   who, at the time when this sin was committed, were in their loins, and
   who have since descended from them by the natural mode of propagation,
   according to the primitive benediction. For in Adam "all have sinned."
   (Rom. v. 12.) Wherefore, whatever punishment was brought down upon our
   first parents, has likewise pervaded and yet pursues all their
   posterity. So that all men "are by nature the children of wrath,"
   (Ephes. ii. 3,) obnoxious to condemnation, and to temporal as well as
   to eternal death; they are also devoid of that original righteousness
   and holiness. (Rom. v. 12, 18, 19.) With these evils they would remain
   oppressed forever, unless they were liberated by Christ Jesus; to whom
   be glory forever.
     __________________________________________________________________

  DISPUTATION 8

  ON ACTUAL SINS

  RESPONDENT, CASPER WILTENS

   I. As divines and philosophers are often compelled, on account of a
   penury of words, to distinguish those which are synonymous, and to
   receive others in a stricter or more ample signification than their
   nature and etymology will allow; so in this matter of actual sin,
   although the term applies also to the first sin of Adam, yet, for the
   sake of a more accurate distinction, they commonly take it for that sin
   which man commits, through the corruption of his nature, from the time
   where he knows how to use reason; and they define it thus: "Something
   thought, spoken or done against the law of God; or the omission of
   something which has been commanded by that law to be thought, spoken or
   done." Or, with more brevity, "Sin is the transgression of the law;"
   which St. John has explained in this compound word anomia "anomy." (1
   John iii. 4.)

   II. For as the law is perceptive of good and prohibitory of evil, it is
   necessary not only that an action, but that the neglect of an action,
   be accounted a sin. Hence arises the first distinction of sin into that
   of commission, when a prohibited act is perpetrated, as theft, murder,
   adultery, &c. And into that of omission, when a man abstains from [the
   performance of] an act that has been commanded; as if any one does not
   render due honour to a magistrate, or bestows on the poor nothing in
   proportion to the amplitude of his means. And since the Law is
   two-fold, one "the Law of works," properly called, "the Law," the other
   "the Law of faith," (Rom. iii. 27,) which is the gospel of the grace of
   God; therefore sin is either that which is committed against the Law,
   or against the gospel of Christ. (Heb. ii. 2, 3.) That which is
   committed against the Law, provokes the wrath of God against sinners;
   that against the gospel, causes the wrath of God to abide upon us; the
   former, by deserving punishment; the latter, by preventing the
   remission of punishment.

   III. One is a sin per se, "of itself;" another, per accidens,
   "accidentally." (1.) A sin per se is every external or internal action
   which is prohibited by the law, or every neglect of an action commanded
   by the law. (2.) A sin is per accidens either in things necessary and
   restricted by law, or in things indifferent. In things necessary,
   either when an act prescribed by law is performed without its due
   circumstances, such as to bestow alms that you obtain praise from men;
   (Matt. vi. 2;) or when an act prohibited by law is omitted, not from a
   due cause and for a just end; as when any one represses his anger at
   the moment, that he may afterwards exact more cruel vengeance. In
   things indifferent, when any one uses them to the offense of the weak.
   (Rom. xiv. 15, 21.)

   IV. Sin is likewise divided in reference to the personal object against
   whom the offense is committed; and it is either against God, against
   our neighbour, or against ourselves, according to what the Apostle
   says: "The grace of God that bringeth salvation, hath appeared to all
   men, teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should
   live soberly, righteously and godly, in this present world." (Tit. ii.
   11.) Where soberness is appropriately referred to the man himself;
   righteousness to our neighbour; and godliness to God: These, we affirm,
   are likewise contained in the two grand precepts, "Love God above all
   things," and "Love thy neighbour as thyself." For howsoever it may
   seem, that the ten commandments prescribe only what is due to God and
   to our neighbour; yet this very requirement is of such a nature that it
   cannot be performed by a man without fulfilling at the same time his
   duty to himself.

   V. It is further distinguished, from its cause, into sins of ignorance,
   infirmity, malignity and negligence. (1.) A sin of ignorance is, when a
   man does any thing which he does not know to be a sin; thus, Paul
   persecuted Christ in his Church. (1 Tim. i. 13.) (2.) A sin of
   infirmity is, when, through fear, which may befall even a brave man, or
   through any other more vehement passion and perturbation of mind, he
   commits any offense; thus, Peter denied Christ, (Matt. xxvi, 70,) and
   thus David, being offended by Nabal, was proceeding to destroy him and
   his domestics. (1 Sam. xxv. 13, 21.) (3.) A sin of dignity or malice,
   when any thing is committed with a determined purpose of mind, and with
   deliberate counsel; thus Judas denied Christ, (Matt. xxvi. 14, 15.) and
   thus David caused Uriah to be killed. (2 Sam. xi. 15.) (4.) A sin of
   negligence is, when a man is overtaken by a sin, (Gal. vi, l.) which
   encircles and besets him before he can reflect within himself about the
   deed. (Heb. xii. 1.) In this description will be classed that of St.
   Paul against Ananias the High Priest, if indeed he may be said to have
   sinned in that matter. (Acts xxiii. 3.)

   VI. Nearly allied to this is the distribution of sin into that which is
   contrary to conscience, and that which is not contrary to conscience.
   (1.) A sin against conscience is one that is perpetrated through malice
   and deliberate purpose, laying waste the conscience, and (if committed
   by holy persons) grieving the Holy Spirit so much as to cause Him to
   desist from his usual functions of leading them into the right way, and
   of making them glad in their consciences by his inward testimony.
   (Psalm li. 10, 13.) This is called, by way of eminence, "a sin against
   conscience;" though, when this phrase is taken in a wide acceptation, a
   sin which is committed through infirmity, but which has a previous sure
   knowledge that is applied to the deed, might also be said to be against
   conscience. (2.) A sin not against conscience is either that which is
   by no means such, and which is not committed through a willful and
   wished-for ignorance of the law, as the man who neglects to know what
   he is capable of knowing: or it is that which at least is not such in a
   primary degree, but is precipitated through precipitancy, the cause of
   which is a vehement and unforeseen temptation. Of this kind, was the
   too hasty judgment of David against Mephibosheth, produced by the
   grievous accusation of Ziba, which happened at the very time when David
   fled. This bore a strong resemblance to a falsehood. (2 Sam. xvi. 3,
   4.) Yet that which, when once committed, is not contrary to conscience,
   becomes contrary to it when more frequently repeated, and when the man
   neglects self-correction.

   VII. To this may be added, the division of sin from its causes, with
   regard to the real object about which the sin is perpetrated. This
   object is either "the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, or the
   pride of life," that is, either pleasure specially so called, or
   avarice, or arrogant haughtiness; all of which, proceeding from the
   single fountain of self love or inordinate affection, tend distinctly
   towards the good things of the present life, haughtiness towards its
   honours, avarice towards its riches, and pleasure towards those things
   by which the external senses may experience self-gratification. From
   these arise those works of the flesh which are enumerated by the
   apostle in Gal. v. 19-21, perhaps with the exception of idolatry. Yet
   it may be made a legitimate subject of discussion, whether idolatry may
   not be referred to one of these three causes.

   VIII. Sin is also divided into venial and mortal: but this distribution
   is not deduced from the nature of sin itself, but accidentally from the
   gracious estimation of God. For every sin is in its own nature mortal,
   that is, it is that which merits death; because it is declared
   universally concerning sin, that "its wages is death," (Rom. vi. 23,)
   which might in truth be brought instantly down upon the offenders, were
   God wishful to enter into judgment with his servants. But that which
   denominates sin venial, or capable of being forgiven, is this
   circumstance, God is not willing to impute sin to believers, or to
   place sin against them, but is desirous to pardon it; although with
   this difference, that it requires express penitence from some, while
   concerning others it is content with this expression: "Who can
   understand his errors? Cleanse thou me, O Lord, from secret faults."
   (Psalm xix. 12.) In this case, the ground of fear is not so much, lest,
   from the aggravation of sin, men should fall into despair, as, lest,
   from its extenuation, they should relapse into negligence and security;
   not only because man has a greater propensity to the latter than to the
   former, but likewise because that declaration is always at hand: have
   no pleasure in the death of him that dieth," that is, of the sinner who
   has merited death by his transgressions, "but that he be converted and
   live." (Ezek. xviii. 32.)

   IX. Because we say that the wages of every sin is death," we do not, on
   this account, with the Stoics, make them all equal. For, beside the
   refutation of such an opinion by many passages of Scripture, it is
   likewise opposed to the diversity of objects against which sin is
   perpetrated, to the causes from which it arises, and to the law against
   which the offense is committed. Besides, the disparity of punishments
   in the death that is eternal, proves the falsehood of this sentiment:
   For a crime against God is more grievous than one against man; (1 Sam.
   ii. 25;) one that is perpetrated with a high hand, than one through
   error; one against a prohibitory law, than one against a mandatory law.
   And far more severe will be the punishment inflicted on the inhabitants
   of Chorazin and Bethsaida, than on those of Tyre and Sidon. (Matt. xi.
   23.) By means of this dogma, the Stoics have endeavoured to turn men
   aside from the commission of crimes; but their attempt has not only
   been fruitless, but also injurious, as will be seen when we institute a
   serious deliberation about bringing man back from sin into the way of
   righteousness.

   X. Mention is likewise made, in the Scriptures, of "a sin unto death;"
   (1 John v. 16;) which is specially so called, because it in fact,
   brings certain death on all by whom it has been committed. Mention is
   made in the same passage of "a sin which is not unto death," and which
   is opposed to the former. In a parallel column with these, marches the
   division of sin into pardonable and unpardonable. (1.) A sin which is
   "not unto death" and pardonable, is so called, because it is capable of
   having subsequent repentance, and thus of being pardoned, and because
   to many persons it is actually pardoned through succeeding
   penitence-such as that which is said to be committed against "the Son
   of Man." (2.) The "sin unto death" or unpardonable, is that which never
   has subsequent repentance, or the author of which cannot be recalled to
   penitence--such as that which is called "the sin" or "blasphemy against
   the Holy Ghost," (Matt. xii. 32; Luke xii. 10,) of which it is said,
   "it shall not be forgiven, either in this world, or in the world to
   come." For this reason, St. John says, we must not pray for that sin.

   XI. But, though the proper meaning and nature of the sin against the
   Holy Ghost are with the utmost difficulty to be ascertained, yet we
   prefer to follow those who have furnished the most weighty and grievous
   definition of it, rather than those who, in maintaining six species of
   it, have been compelled to explain "unpardonable" in some of those
   species, for that which is with difficulty or is rarely remitted, or
   which of itself deserves not to be pardoned. With the former class of
   persons, therefore, we say that the sin against the Holy Ghost is
   committed when any man, with determined malice, resists divine, and in
   fact, evangelical truth, for the sake of resistance, though he is so
   overpowered with the refulgence of it, as to be rendered incapable of
   pleading ignorance in excuse. This is therefore called "the sin against
   the Holy Ghost, not because it is not perpetrated against the Father
   and the Son; (for how can it be that he does not sin against the Father
   and the Son, who sins against the Spirit of both?) but because it is
   committed against the operation of the Holy Spirit, that is, against
   the conviction of the truth through miracles, and against the
   illumination of the mind.

   XII. But the cause why this sin is called "irremissible," and why he
   who has committed it, cannot be renewed to repentance, is not the
   impotency of God, as though by his most absolute omnipotence, he cannot
   grant to this man repentance unto life, and thus cannot pardon this
   blasphemy; but since it is necessary, that the mercy of God should stop
   at some point, being circumscribed by the limits of his justice and
   equity according to the prescript of his wisdom, this sin is said to be
   "unpardonable," because God accounts the man who has perpetrated so
   horrid a crime, and has done despite to the Spirit of grace, to be
   altogether unworthy of having the divine benignity and the operation of
   the Holy Spirit occupied in his conversion, lest he should himself
   appear to esteem this sacred operation and kindness at a low rate, and
   to stand in need of a sinful man, especially of one who is such a
   monstrous sinner!

   XIII. The efficient cause of actual sins is, man through his own free
   will. The inwardly working cause is the original propensity of our
   nature towards that which is contrary to the divine law, which
   propensity we have contracted from our first parents, through carnal
   generation. The outwardly working causes are the objects and occasions
   which solicit men to sin. The substance or material cause, is an act
   which, according to its nature, has reference to good. The form or
   formal cause of it is a transgression of the law, or an anomy. It is
   destitute of an end; because sin is amartia a transgression which
   wanders from its aim. The object of it is a variable good; to which,
   when man is inclined, after having deserted the unchangeable good, he
   commits an offense.

   XIV. The effect of actual sins are all the calamities and miseries of
   the present life, then death temporal, and afterwards death eternal.
   But in those who are hardened and blinded, even the effects of
   preceding sins become cousequent sins themselves.
     __________________________________________________________________

  DISPUTATION 9

  ON THE RIGHTEOUSNESS AND EFFICACY OF THE PROVIDENCE OF GOD CONCERNING EVIL

  RESPONDENT: RALPH DE ZYLL

   I. Among the causes and pretenses by which human ignorance has been
   induced, and which human perverseness has abused, to deny the
   providence of God, the entrance of evil (that is, of sin) into the
   world, and its most wonderful and fertile exuberance, do not by any
   means occupy the lowest stations. For since, with Scripture as our
   guide and Nature as our witness, we must maintain that God is good,
   omniscient, and of unbounded power; (Mark x. 18; Psalm cxlvii. 5; Rev.
   iv, 8; Rom. i. 20;) and since this is a truth of which every one is
   fully persuaded who has formed in his mind any notion of the Deity; men
   have concluded from this that evil could not have occurred under the
   three preceding conditions of the divine Majesty, if God managed all
   things by his providence, and if it was his will to make provision
   respecting evil, according to these properties of his own nature. And
   therefore, since, after all, evil has occurred, they have concluded
   that the providence of God must be entirely denied. For they thought it
   better to set up a God that was at repose, and negligent of mundane
   affairs, especially of those in which a rational creature's freedom of
   will intervened, than to deprive Him of the honour of his goodness,
   wisdom and power. But it is not necessary to adopt either of these
   methods; and that it is possible to preserve to God, without
   disparagement, these three ornaments of Supreme Majesty, as well as His
   providence, will be shewn by a temperate explanation of the efficacy of
   God concerning evil.

   II. A few things must be premised about this evil itself, as a basis
   for our explanation. (1.) What is properly sin? (2.) Was it possible
   for it to be perpetrated by a rational creature, and how? (3.) That a
   chief evil cannot be granted, which may contend on an equality with the
   chief Good, as the Manichees asserted; otherwise, of all the evils
   which can be devised, sin, of which we are now treating, is, in
   reality, the chief; and, if we may speak with strictness, sin is the
   only and sole evil; for all other things are not evils, in themselves,
   but are injurious to some one.

   III. 1. Sin is properly an aberration from a rule. This rule is the
   equity which is preconceived in the mind of God, which is expressed to
   the mind of a rational creature by legislation, and, according to which
   it is proper for such a creature to regulate his life. It is therefore
   defined by St. John in one compound word, anomia "the transgression of
   the law;" (1 John iii. 4;) whether such a law be preceptive of Good, or
   prohibitory of evil, (Psalm xxxiv. 14,) hence the evil of commission is
   perpetrated against the prohibitory part, and that of omission against
   the preceptive. But in sin, two things come under consideration: (1.)
   The act itself, which has reference to natural good; but under the act,
   we comprehend likewise the cessation from action. (2.) Anomy, or "the
   transgression of the law," which obtains the place of a moral evil. The
   act may be called the substance or material cause of sin; and the
   transgression of the law, its form or formal cause.

   IV. II. But it was possible for sin to be perpetrated by a rational
   creature; for, as a creature, he was capable of declining or revolting
   from the chief Good, and of being inclined towards an inferior good,
   and towards the acts by which he might possess this minor good. As
   rational, he was capable of understanding that he was required to live
   in a godly manner, and what that equity was according to which his life
   and actions were to be specially regulated. As a rational creature, a
   law could be imposed on him by God, nay, according to equity and
   justice, it ought to be imposed, by which he might be forbidden to
   forsake the chief good, and to commit that act, though it was naturally
   good. The mode is placed in the freedom of the will, bestowed by God on
   a rational creature, according to which he was capable of performing
   the obedience which is due to the law, or could by his own strength
   exceed or transgress its limits.

   V. III. But since a chief evil cannot be allowed, it follows from this,
   that, though evil be contrary to good, yet it cannot pass beyond the
   universal order of that good which is chief, but can be reduced to
   order by this chief good, and evil can thus be directed to good, on
   account of the infinite wisdom of this chief good, by which he knows
   what is possible to be made from evil; and on account of this power, by
   which he can make from this evil what he knows may be made from it.
   Granting, therefore, that sin has exceeded the order of every thing
   created, yet it is circumscribed within the order of the Creator
   himself and of the chief good. Since it is apparent from all these
   premises, that the providence of God ought not to intervene, or come
   between, to prevent the perpetration of evil by a free creature; it
   also follows, from the entrance of evil into the world, and it has
   entered so far "that the whole world lieth in wickedness," (1 John v.
   19,) -- that the Providence of God cannot be destroyed. This truth we
   will demonstrate at greater length, when we treat upon the efficacy of
   the providence of God concerning evil.

   VI. We have already said, that, in sin, the act or the cessation from
   action, and "the transgression of the law," come under consideration:
   But the efficiency of God about evil, concerns both the act itself and
   its viciousness, and it does this, whether we have regard to the
   beginning of sin, to its progress, or to its end and consummation. The
   consideration of the efficiency which is concerned about the Beginning
   of sin, embraces either a hindrance or a permission; to which we add,
   the administration of arguments and occasions inciting to sin; that
   which regards its Progress, has direction and determination; and that
   concerning The End and Termination, punishment and remission. We will
   refrain from treating upon the concurrence of God, since it is only in
   reference to the act, considered, also, as naturally good.

   VII. The First efficiency of God concerning evil, is a hindrance or the
   placing of an impediment, whether such hindrance be sufficient or
   efficacious. (Jer. xxxi. 32, 33.) For it belongs to a good, to hinder
   an evil as far as the good knows it to be lawful to do so. But a
   hindrance is placed either on the power, on the capability, or on the
   will, of a rational creature. These three things must also be
   considered in that which hinders. (1.) On the power an impediment is
   placed, by which some act is taken away from the power of a rational
   creature, to the performance of which it has an inclination and
   sufficient powers. By being thus circumscribed, it comes to pass, that
   the creature cannot perform that act without sin, and this
   circumscription is made by legislation. The tasting of the tree of the
   knowledge of good and evil was thus circumscribed, when leave was
   granted to eat of all others: (Gen. ii. 17) and this is the hindrance
   of sin as such; and it is placed by God before a rational creature as
   he has the right and power over that creature.

   VIII. (2.) On the capability also an impediment is placed.

   The effect of this is, that the rational creature cannot perform the
   act, for the performance of which he has an inclination, and powers
   that, without this impediment, would be sufficient. But this hindrance
   is placed before a rational creature by four methods: (1.) By depriving
   the creature of essence and life, which are the foundation of
   capability. Thus was the attack upon Jerusalem hindered, (2 Kings 19,)
   as was also the forcible abduction of Elijah to Ahaziah, (2 Kings 1,)
   when, in the former instance, "an hundred fourscore and five thousand
   men were slain by the angel of the Lord," and, in the latter, two
   different companies, each containing fifty men, were consumed by fire.
   (2.) The second method is by the taking away or the diminution of
   capability. Thus Jeroboam was prevented from apprehending the prophet
   of the Lord, by "the drying up of his own hand." (1 Kings 13, 4.) Thus,
   sin is hindered, so as not to exercise dominion over a man, when the
   body of sin is weakened and destroyed. (Rom. vi. 6.) (3.) The third is
   by the opposition of a greater capability, or at least of one that is
   equal. Thus was Uzziah prevented from burning incense unto Jehovah,
   when the priests resisted his attempt. (2 Chron. xxvi. 18, 21.) Thus
   also is "the flesh" hindered from "doing what it would," "because the
   Spirit lusteth against the flesh," (Gal. v. 17,) and because "greater
   is He that is in us, than he that is in the world." (1 John iv. 4.)
   (4.) The fourth method is by the withdrawing of the object. Thus the
   Jews were frequently hindered from hurting Christ, because He withdrew
   himself from the midst of them. (John viii. 59.) Thus was Paul taken
   away, by the Chief Captain, from the Jews, who had conspired together
   for his destruction. (Acts xxiii. 10.)

   IX. (3.) An impediment is placed on the will, when by some argument it
   is persuaded not to will to commit a sin. But we refer the arguments by
   which the will is moved, to the following three classes. For they are
   taken, (i.) either from the impossibility or the difficulty of the
   thing, (ii.) from its unpleasantness or inconvenience, its usefulness
   or injuriousness, (iii.) or from its being dishonourable, unjust and
   indecorous. (i.) By the first of these, the Pharisees and Scribes were
   frequently prevented from laying violent hands on Christ: (Matt. xxi.
   46) for they were of opinion, that he would be defended by the people,
   "who took him for a prophet." In the same manner were the Israelites
   hindered from departing to their lovers, to false gods; for God "hedged
   up their way with thorns, and made a wall, so that they could not find
   their customary paths." (Hosea ii. 6, 7.) Thus the saints are deterred
   from sinning, when they see wicked men "wearied in the ways of iniquity
   and perdition." (Wisdom v. 7.) (ii.) By the second argument, the
   brethren of Joseph were hindered from killing him, since they could
   obtain their end by selling him. (Gen. xxxvii. 26, 27.) Thus Job was
   prevented from sinning "with his eyes" because he knew what was "the
   portion of God from above, and what the inheritance of the Almighty
   from on high," for those who have their eyes full of adultery. (Job
   xxxi. 1, 2.) (iii.) By the third, Joseph was hindered from defiling
   himself by shameful adultery, (Gen. xxxix. 8, 9,) and David was
   prevented from "stretching forth his hand against the Lord's anointed."
   (1 Sam. xxiv. 7.)

   X. The permission of sin succeeds, which is opposed to hindering. Yet
   it is not opposed to hindering, as the latter is an act which is taken
   away from the power of a rational creature by legislation; for, in that
   case, the same act would be a sin, and not a sin. It would be a sin in
   reference to its being a forbidden act; and it would be no sin in
   reference to its being permitted in this manner, that is, not
   forbidden. But permission is opposed to hindrance, in reference to the
   latter being an impediment placed on the capability and will of an
   intelligent creature. But permission is the suspension, not of one
   impediment or two, which may be presented to the capability or the
   will, but of all impediments at once, which, God knows, if they were
   all employed, would effectually hinder sin. Such necessarily would be
   the result, because sin might be hindered by a single impediment of
   that kind. (1.) Sin therefore is permitted to the capability of the
   creature, when God employs none of those hindrances of which we have
   already made mention in the 8th Thesis: for this reason, this
   permission consists of the following acts of God who permits, the
   continuation of life and essence to the creature, the conservation of
   his capability, a cautiousness against its being opposed by a greater
   capability, or at least by one that is equal, and the exhibition of an
   object on which sin is committed. (2.) Sin is also permitted to the
   will; not because no such impediments are presented by God to the will,
   as are calculated to deter the will from sinning; but because God,
   seeing that these hindrances which are propounded will produce no
   effect, does not employ others which He possesses in the treasures of
   his wisdom and power. (John xviii. 6;

   Mark xiv. 56.) This appears most evidently in the passion of Christ,
   with regard not only to the power but also to the will of those who
   demanded his death. (John xix. 6.) Nor does it follow from these
   premises, that those impediments are employed in vain: for though such
   results do not follow as are in accordance with these hindrances, yet
   God in a manner the most powerful gains his own purposes, because the
   results are not such as ought to have followed. (Rom. x. 20, 21.)

   XI. The foundation of this permission is (1.) The liberty of choosing,
   with which God formed his rational creature, and which his constancy
   does not suffer to be abolished, lest he should be accused of
   mutability. (2.) The infinite wisdom and power of God, by which he
   knows and is able out of darkness to bring light, and to produce good
   out of evil. (Gen. i. 2, 3; 2 Cor. iv. 6.) God therefore permits that
   which He does permit, not in ignorance of the powers and the
   inclination of rational creatures, for he knows them all, not with
   reluctance, for he could have refrained from producing a creature that
   might possess freedom of choice, not as being incapable of hindering,
   for we have already seen by how many methods he is able to hinder both
   the capability and the will of a rational creature; not as if at ease,
   indifferent, or negligent of that which is transacted, because before
   anything is done he already ["has gone through"] has looked over the
   various actions which concern it, and, as we shall subsequently see, [
   15-22,] he presents arguments and occasions, determines, directs,
   punishes and pardons sin. But whatever God permits, He permits it
   designedly and willingly, His will being immediately occupied about its
   permission, but His permission itself is occupied about sin; and this
   order cannot be inverted without great peril.

   XII. Let us now explain a little more distinctly, by some of the
   differences of sin, those things which we have in this place spoken in
   a general manner concerning hindering and permission. (i.) From its
   causes, sin is distinguished into that of ignorance, infirmity,
   malignity and negligence. (1.) An impediment is placed on a sin of
   ignorance, by the revelation of the divine will. (Psalm cxix. 105.)
   (ii.) On a sin of infirmity, by the strengthening influence of the Holy
   Spirit against the machinations or the world and Satan, and also
   against the weakness of our flesh. (Ephes. iii. 16; vi, 11-13.) (iii.)
   On a sin of malignity, by "taking away the stony heart, and bestowing a
   heart of flesh," (Ezek. xi. 19,) and inscribing upon it the law of God:
   (Jer. xxxi. 33.) (iv.) And on a sin of negligence, by exciting in the
   hearts of believers a holy solicitude and a godly fear. (Mark xiv. 38;
   Jer. xxxii. 40.) From these remarks those acts will easily be manifest,
   in the suspension of which consists the permission of sins of every
   kind. God permitted Saul of Tarsus, a preposterous zealot for the law,
   to persecute Christ through ignorance, until "he revealed his Son in
   him," by which act out of a persecutor was formed a pastor. (Gal. i.
   13-15.) Thus, he permitted Peter, who loved Christ, though he was
   somewhat too self-confident, to deny Him through infirmity; but, when
   afterwards endued with a greater energy of the Holy Spirit, he
   confessed him with intrepidity even unto death. (Matt. xxvi. 70; Acts
   v. 41; John xxi. 19.) God permitted Saul, whom "in his anger he had
   given to the Israelites as their king" (Hosea xiii. 11; 1 Sam. ix. 1,)
   through malignity to persecute David, of whose integrity he had been
   convinced, (1 Sam. xxiv. 17-19,) while his own son Jonathan resisted
   [his father's attempts against David] in vain. And God permitted David,
   after having enjoyed many victories and obtained leisure and
   retirement, to defile himself with the foul crime of adultery at a
   moment when he was acting with negligence. (2 Sam. 11.)

   XIII. (2.) Sin, in the next place, is distinguished with respect to the
   two parts of the law--that which is perceptive of good, and that which
   is prohibitory of evil. [ 3.] Against the latter of these an offense
   may be committed, either by performing an act, or by omitting its
   performance from an undue cause and end. Against the former, either by
   omitting an act, or by performing it in an undue manner, and from an
   undue cause and end. To these distinctions the hindering and the
   permission of God may likewise be adapted. God hindered Joseph's
   brethren from killing him; while he permitted them to spare his life,
   from an undue cause and end; for since it was in their power to sell
   him, the opportunity for which was divinely offered to them, they
   considered it unprofitable or useless to kill him. (Gen. xxxvii. 26,
   27.) Thus Absalom was hindered from following the counsel of
   Ahithophel, though it was useful to himself and injurious to David; not
   because he considered it to be unjust, but because of its supposed
   injury to David; for he persisted in the purpose of persecuting his
   father, which he also completed in fact. (2 Sam. 17.) God hindered
   Balaam from cursing the children of Israel, and caused him to bless
   them; but so that he abstained from the former act, and performed the
   latter, with a perverse mind. (Num. 23.) We shall in some degree
   understand the reasons of this hindering and permission, if, while
   distinctly considering in sin the act and the anomy or "transgression
   of the law," we apply to each of them divine hindrance and permission.

   XIV. But though the act, and "the transgression of the law," are
   inseparably united in one sin, and therefore neither of them can be
   hindered or permitted without the other; yet they may be distinguished
   in the mind; and hindrance as well as permission may be effected by
   God, sometimes chiefly with regard to the act, and at other times
   chiefly with regard to "the transgression of the law," and, when so
   done, they may be considered by us in these relations not without high
   commendation of the wisdom of God and to our own profit. God hindered
   Joseph's brethren from killing him, not as it was a sin, (because He
   permitted them, while remaining in the same mind to sell him,) but as
   it was an act. For they would have deprived Joseph of life, when it was
   the will of God that he should be spared. God permitted his vendition,
   not chiefly as it was a sin, but as an act; because by the sale of
   Joseph as it was an act, God obtained his own end. (Gen. xxxvii. 27.)
   God hindered Elijah from being forcibly brought to Ahaziah to be slain,
   not as that was a sin, but as it was an act. This is apparent from the
   end, and from the mode of hindering. From the end; because it was His
   will that the life of his prophet should be spared, not lest Ahaziah
   should sin against God. From the mode of hindering; because he
   destroyed two companies, of fifty men each, who had been sent to seize
   him; which was a token of divine anger against Ahaziah and the men, by
   which sin as such is not usually hindered, but as it is an act which
   will prove injurious to another; yet, through grace, sin is hindered as
   such. (2 Kings 1.) God permitted Satan and the Chaldeans to bring many
   evils on Job, not as that was a sin, but as it was an act: for it was
   the will of God to try the patience of his servant, and to make that
   virtue conspicuous to the confusion of Satan. But this was done by an
   act, by which, as such, injuries were inflicted on Job. (Job 1, 2.)
   David was hindered from laying violent hands on Saul, not as it was an
   act, but as it was a sin: this is manifest from the argument by which
   being hindered he abstained [from completing the deed.] "The Lord
   forbid," said he, "that I should stretch forth mine hand against the
   Lord's anointed." This argument deterred him from the sin as such. The
   same is also evident from the end of the hindrance: for it was the will
   of God for David to come to [the possession of] the kingdom through the
   endurance of afflictions, as a type of Christ the true David. (1 Sam.
   xxiv. 7.) God permitted Ahab to kill Naboth, not as that foul deed was
   an act, but as it was a sin: for God could have translated Naboth, or
   taken him to himself, by some other method; but it was the divine will,
   that Ahab should fill up the measure of his iniquities, and should
   accelerate his own destruction and that of his family. (1 Kings 21.)
   Abimelech was hindered from violating the chastity of Sarah, the wife
   of Abraham, both as it was an act, and as it was a sin. For it was not
   the will of God, that Abimelech should defile himself with this crime,
   because "in the integrity of his heart" he would then have done it. It
   was also His will to spare his servant Abraham, in whom indelible
   sorrow would have been produced by the deflowering of his wife, as by
   an act. (Gen. xx. 6.) God permitted Judah to know Tamar his
   daughter-in-law, both as it was an act, and as it was a sin: because it
   was the will of God, to have his own Son as a direct descendant from
   Judah; and at the same time to declare, that nothing is so polluted as
   to be incapable of being sanctified in Christ Jesus. (Gen. xxxviii.
   18.) For it is not without reason that St. Matthew says, "Judas begat
   Phares and Zara of Thamar;" and "David the king begat Solomon of her
   who had been the wife of Urias;" (i, 3, 6;) and from whom in an
   uninterrupted line Christ was born.

   XV. But since an act, though permitted to the capability and the will
   of the creature, may have been taken away from its power by
   legislation; [ 7;] and since, therefore, it will very often happen,
   that a rational creature not altogether hardened in evil is unwilling
   to perform an act which is connected with sin, unless when some
   arguments and opportunities are presented to him, which are like
   incentives to commit that act; the management of this presenting of
   arguments and opportunities, is also in the hands of the Providence of
   God, who presents these excitements. (1.) Both to try whether it be the
   will of the creature to abstain from sinning, even when it is excited
   by these incentives; since small praise is due to abstaining in cases
   in which such excitements are absent. (S. of Sirach xx. 21-23; xxxi.
   8-10.) (2.) And then, if it be the will of the creature to yield to
   these incentives, to effect His own work by the act of the creature;
   not impelled by necessity, as if God was unable to produce his own work
   without the intervention of the act of his creature; but moved to this
   by the will to illustrate his own manifold wisdom. Thus the arguments
   by which Joseph's brethren were incited through their own malice to
   wish to kill him, and the opportunities by which it was in their power
   to send him out of their way, were offered by Divine dispensation,
   partly in an intervening manner by the mediate act of men, and partly
   by the immediate act of God himself. The arguments for this malignity
   were, Joseph's accusation, by which he revealed to his father the
   wicked actions of his brethren, the peculiar regard which Jacob
   entertained for Joseph, the sending of a dream, and the relation of the
   dream after it had occurred. By these, the minds of his brethren were
   inflamed with envy and hatred against him. The opportunities were, the
   sending of Joseph to his brethren by his father, and the presenting of
   the Ishmaelites journeying into Egypt, at the very moment of time in
   which they were in deliberation about murdering their brother. (Gen.
   37.) The preceding considerations have related only to the Beginning of
   sin; to its Progress belong direction and determination. [ 6.]

   XVI. The Direction of sin is an act of Divine Providence, by which God
   in a manner the wisest and most potent directs sin wherever he wills,
   "reaching from one end to another mightily, and sweetly ordering all
   things." (Wisd. viii. 1.) We must consider in this direction the point
   at which it has its origin and that at which it terminates. For when
   God directs sin wherever he wills, it is understood that he leads it
   away from the point to which it is not His will that it should proceed.
   But this direction is two-fold, unto an Object, and unto an End.
   Direction unto an Object is when God allows the sin which He permits,
   to be borne, not at the option of the creature, towards an object which
   in any way whatsoever is exposed and liable to the injury of sin; but
   which he directs to a particular object, which on some occasions has
   either been no part of the sinner's aim or desire, or which at least he
   has not absolutely desired. The Scriptures enunciate this kind of
   direction, generally, in the following words: "A man's heart deviseth
   his way; but the Lord directeth his steps." (Prov. xvi. 9.) But,
   Specially, concerning the heart of a King: "As the rivers of water are
   in the hand of the Lord, he turneth the heart of the king whithersoever
   he will." (Prov. xxi. 1.) Of which we have a signal example in
   Nebuchadnezzar, who, after he had determined in his own mind to
   subjugate the nations, and hesitated whether he should move against the
   Ammonites, or against the Jews, God managed the king's divinations so,
   that he resolved to march against the Jews, and to abstain from an
   attack upon the Ammonites. (Ezek. xxi. 19- 22.)

   XVII. Direction unto an End is, when God does not allow the sin (which
   he permits,) to be subservient to the end of any thing which the
   creature intends; but he employs it to that end which he himself wills,
   whether the creature intend the same end, (which if he were to do, yet
   he would not be excused from sin,) or whether he intend another, and
   one quite contrary. For God knows how to educe the light of his own
   glory, and the advantage of his creatures, out of the darkness and
   mischief of sin. Thus "the thoughts of evil," which Joseph's brethren
   entertained against him, were converted by God into a benefit, not only
   to Joseph, but also to the whole of Jacob's family, and to all the
   kingdom of Egypt. (Gen. i. 20, 21.) By the afflictions which were sent
   to Job, Satan endeavoured to drive him to blasphemy. But by them, God
   tried the patience of his servant, and through it triumphed over Satan.
   (Job i. 11, 12, 22; ii, 9, 10.) The king of Assyria had determined "in
   his heart to destroy and cut off all nations not a few." But God
   executed his own work by him, whom "he sent against an hypocritical
   nation and the people of his wrath." (Isa. x. 5-12.) Nor is it at all
   wonderful, that God employs acts, which his creatures do not perform
   without sin, for ends that are pleasing to himself; because he does
   this most justly, for three reasons: (i.) For He is the Lord of his
   creature, though that creature be a sinner; because he has no more
   power to exempt or deliver himself from the dominion of God, than he
   has to reduce himself into nothing. (ii.) Because, as a creature
   endowed by God with inclination and capability, he performs those acts,
   though not without sin, as they have been forbidden. (iii.) Because the
   creature is a saw, in the hands of the Creator; and instrumental causes
   do not reach to the intention of the first agent. (Isa. x. 15.)

   XVIII. Determination is an act of Divine Providence, by which God
   places a limit on his permission, and a boundary on sin that it may not
   wander and stray in infinitum at the option of the creature. The limit
   and boundary are placed by the prescribing of the time, and the
   determination of the magnitude. The prescribing of the time, is the
   prescribing of the very point or moment when it may be done, or the
   length of its duration. (i.) God determines the moment of time, when he
   permits a sin, to the commission of which his creature is inclined, to
   be perpetrated, not indeed at the time when it was the will of the
   creature to commit it; but He wisely and powerfully contrives for it to
   be done at another time. "The Jews sought to take Jesus: but no man
   laid hands on him, because his hour was not yet come." (John vii. 30.)
   "Yet when the time before appointed of the Father" approached, Christ
   said to them, "This is your hour, and the power of darkness." (Luke
   xxii, 53.) (2.) A limit is placed on the duration, when the space of
   time in which the permitted sin could endure, is diminished and
   circumscribed so as to stop itself. Thus Christ says, "Except those
   days should be shortened, there should no flesh be saved," &c. (Matt.
   xxiv. 22.) But in this part of the discussion also, regard must be had
   to the act as such, and to the sin as such. (i.) A limit is placed on
   the duration of the act, in the following passages: "The rod of the
   wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous, lest the righteous
   put forth their hands unto iniquity." (Psalm cxxv. 3.) "The Lord
   knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temptations," &c. (2 Pet. ii.
   9.) (ii.) A limit is placed on the duration of the sin, in these
   passages: "Therefore I will hedge up thy way with thorns, &c. And she
   shall not find her lovers: then shall she say, I will go and return to
   my first husband." (Hosea ii. 6.) "In times past God suffered all
   nations to walk in their own ways: but now he commandeth all men every
   where to repent." (Acts xiv. 16; xvii, 30.)

   XIX. A limit is placed on the magnitude of sin, when God does not
   permit sin to increase beyond bounds and to assume greater strength.
   But this also is done, with regard to it both as an act, and as a sin.
   (i.) With respect to it as an act, in the following passages of
   Scripture: God permitted "the wrath of their enemies to be kindled
   against" the Israelites, but "he did not suffer them to swallow them
   up." (Psalm cxxiv. 2, 3.) "There hath no temptation taken you, but such
   as is common to man." (1 Cor. x. 13.) "We are perplexed, but not in
   despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed."
   (2 Cor. iv. 8, 9.) God permitted Satan, first, "To put forth his hand
   upon all that Job had," but not to touch him; (Job i. 12;) and,
   secondly, "To touch his bone and his flesh, but to save his life." (ii,
   6.) "I will not destroy them by the hand of Shishak; nevertheless, they
   shall be his servants." (2 Chron. xii. 7, 8.) (ii.) With respect to it
   as a sin, God permitted David to resolve in his mind to destroy with
   the sword, Nabal and all his domestics, and to go instantly to him; but
   he did not permit him to shed innocent blood, and to save himself by
   his own hand. (1 Sam. xxv. 22, 26, 31.) God permitted David to flee to
   Achish, and to "feign himself mad;" (1 Sam. xxi. 13;) but he did not
   permit him to fight, in company with the army of Achish, against the
   Israelites, or by the exercise of fraud to prove injurious to the army
   of Achish. (xxvii, 2; xxix, 6, 7.) For he could have done neither of
   these deeds without committing a most flagrant wickedness: though both
   of them might have been determined [by David] as acts, by which great
   injury could be inflicted on those against whom it was the will of God
   that no mischief should be done.

   XX. On account of this Presenting of incitements and opportunities, and
   this Direction and Determination of God, added to the Permission of
   sin, God is said himself to do those evils which are perpetrated by bad
   men and by Satan. For instance, Joseph says to his brethren, "It was
   not you that sent me hither, but God:" (Gen. xlv. 8;) because, after
   having completed the sale of their brother, they were unconcerned about
   the place to which he was to be conducted, and about his future lot in
   life: but God caused him to be led down into Egypt and there to be
   sold, and he raised him to an eminent station in that country by the
   interpretation of some dreams. (xxxvii, 25, 28; xl, 12, 13; xli,
   28-42.) Job says, "The Lord hath taken away" what was taken away at the
   instigation and by the aid of Satan; (Job 1 & 2;) both because that
   evil spirit was of his own malice instigated against Job by God's
   commendation of him; and because, after having obtained power to do him
   harm, he produced no further effect than that which God had determined.
   Thus God is also said to have done what Absalom did; (2 Sam. xii. 11,
   12; 15, 16;) because the principal parts, in the various actions
   employed for producing this consummation, belonged to God. To these we
   must add the remark, that since the wisdom of God knows that if he
   administers the whole affair by such a presenting, direction, and
   determination, that will certainly and infallibly come to pass which
   cannot be done by the creature without criminality; and since His will
   decrees this administration, it will more clearly appear why a deed of
   this kind may be attributed to God.

   XXI. Last in the discussion follow the punishment and the pardon of
   sin, by which acts Divine Providence is occupied about sin already
   perpetrated, as it is such, not as it is an act: for sin is punished
   and pardoned as it is an evil, and because it is an evil. (1.) The
   Punishment of sin is an act of the Providence of God, by which sin is
   recompensed with the chastisement that is due to it according to the
   righteousness of God. This punishment either concerns the life to come,
   or takes place in the ages of the present life: the former is an
   eternal separation of the whole man from God; the other, which is
   usually inflicted in this life, is two-fold: corporal and spiritual.
   The punishments which relate to the body, are various; but it is not
   necessary for our purpose to enumerate them at present. But spiritual
   punishment deserves to be diligently considered: for it is such a
   chastisement of sin, as to be also a cause of other [sins] which follow
   on account of the wickedness of him on whom it is inflicted. It is a
   privation of grace, and a delivering up to the power of evil [or the
   evil one]. (i.) Privation of Grace is two-fold according to the two
   kinds of grace, that which is Habitual and that which is Assisting. The
   former is the taking away of grace, by blinding the mind and hardening
   the heart. (Isa. vi. 9, 10.) The other, is the withdrawing of the
   assistance of the Holy Spirit, who is wont inwardly "to help our
   infirmities," (Rom. viii. 26,) and outwardly to restrain the furious
   rage of Satan and the world, by employing also the ministration and
   care of good angels. (Heb. i. 14; Psalm xci. 11.) (ii.) A delivering up
   to the power of evil is, either "giving sinners over to a reprobate
   mind," and to the efficacy of error, (Rom. i. 28; 2 Thess. ii. 9-11,)
   or to the desires of the flesh and to sinful lusts, (Rom. i. 24,) or to
   the power of Satan, "the god of this world," (2 Cor. 4,) "who worketh
   powerfully in the children of disobedience." (Ephes. ii. 2.) But
   because from this punishment arise many other sins, and this not only
   according to the certain knowledge of God, by which he knows that if he
   thus punishes they will thence arise, but likewise according to his
   purpose, by which he resolves so to punish as, on account of more
   heinous sins thence committed, to punish with still greater severity;
   therefore these expressions occur in the scriptures: "But I will harden
   the heart of Pharaoh, that he shall not let the people go; he shall not
   hearken unto you, that I may lay my hand upon Egypt." (Exod. iv. 21;
   vii, 4.) "Notwithstanding, the sons of Eli hearkened not unto the voice
   of their father, because the Lord would slay them." (1 Sam. ii. 25.)
   "But Amaziah would not hearken to the answer of Joash king of Israel;
   for it came of God, that he might deliver them into the hand of their
   enemies, because they sought after the gods of Edom." (2 Chron. xxv.
   20.) This consideration distinguishes the governance of God concerning
   sins, so far as it is concerned about those sinners who are hardened,
   or those who are not hardened.

   XXII. The Pardon or remission of sin is an act of the Providence of
   God, by which the guilt of sin is forgiven, and the chastisement due to
   sin according to its guilt is taken away. As this remission restores,
   to the favour of God, the man who had before been an enemy; so it
   likewise causes the Divine administration concerning him to be
   afterwards entirely gracious so far as equity and justice require: that
   is, through this pardon, he is free from those spiritual punishments
   which have been enumerated in the preceding paragraph; (Psalm ii.
   10-12;) and though not exempt from corporal chastisements, yet he is
   not visited with them through the anger of God as the punisher of sin,
   but only through the desire of God thus to declare that he hates sin,
   and besides so to chastise as to deter him from falling again into it.
   (2 Sam. xii. 11-13.) For which reason, the government of Providence
   with regard to this man is entirely different from that under which he
   remained before he obtained remission. (Psalm cxix. 67; 1 Cor. xi. 32;
   Psalm xxxii. 1-6.)

   XXIII. From those topics on which we have already treated, it is
   clearly evident, we think, that, because evils have entered into the
   world, neither Providence itself, nor its government respecting evil,
   ought to be denied. Neither can God be accused as being guilty of
   injustice on account of this his governance; not only because he hath
   administered all things to the best ends; that is, to the chastisment,
   trial, and manifestation of the godly--to the punishment and exposure
   of the wicked, and to the illustration of his own glory; (for ends,
   alone, do not justify an action;) but, much more, because he has
   employed that form of administration which allows intelligent creatures
   not only of their own choice or spontaneously. but likewise freely, to
   perform and accomplish their own motions and actions.
     __________________________________________________________________

  DISPUTATION 10

  ON THE RIGHTEOUSNESS AND EFFICACY OF THE PROVIDENCE OF GOD

  CONCERNING EVIL

  RESPONDENT: GERARD ADRIANS

   I. The consideration of evil, which is called "the evil of culpability"
   or "of delinquency," has induced many persons to deny the providence of
   God concerning creatures endowed with understanding and freedom of
   will, and concerning their actions. These persons have denied it for
   two reasons: (1.) They have thought that, because God is good and just,
   omniscient and omnipotent, he would have entirely prevented sin from
   being committed, if in reality he cared by his providence for his
   rational creatures and there actions. (Mark x. 18; Psalm cxlvii. 5;
   Rev. iv. 8; Mal. ii. 17; iii, 14.) (2.) Because they can conceive in
   their minds no other administration of Divine Providence concerning
   evil, than such as would involve God himself in the culpability, and
   would exempt from all criminality the creature, as if he had been
   impelled to sin by an irresistible act of God's efficiency. For this
   reason, then, since a belief in the Providence of God is absolutely
   necessary, (Luke xii. 28,) from whom a considerable part of his
   government is taken away if it be denied that he exercises any care
   over rational creatures and their actions; we will endeavour briefly to
   explain the Efficiency of Divine Providence concerning evil; and at the
   same time to demonstrate from this efficiency, that God cannot possibly
   be aspersed with the charge of injustice, and that no stain of sin can
   attach to him, on the contrary, that this efficiency is highly
   conducive to the commendation of God's righteousness.

   II. But in sin are to be considered not only the act, (under which we
   likewise comprise the omission of the act,) but also "the transgression
   of the law." The act has regard to a natural good, and is called the
   material cause of sin; the transgression is a moral evil, and is called
   the formal cause of sin. An investigation into both of them is
   necessary, when we treat upon the efficiency of God concerning sin: for
   it is occupied about the act as it is an act, and as it is done against
   the law which prohibits its commission; about the omission of the act
   as such, and as it is against the law which commands its performance.
   But this efficiency is to be considered: (1.) With regard to the
   beginning of sin, and its first conception in the heart of a rational
   creature; (2.) its attempt, and, through this attempt, its
   perpetration; and, (3.) with regard to sin when finished. The
   efficiency of God concerning the beginning of sin is either its
   hindrance or permission; and, added to permission, the administration
   both of arguments and occasions inciting to sin; as well as an
   immediate concurrence to produce the act. The Divine efficiency
   concerning the progress of sin comprises its direction and
   determination; and concerning the completion of sin, it is occupied in
   punishing or pardoning.

   III. The First efficiency of God concerning sin, is Hindrance or the
   placing of a hindrance, which, both with regard of the efficiency and
   of the object, is three-fold. With respect to efficiency: For (i.) the
   impediment is either of sufficient efficacy, but such as does not
   hinder sin in the act. (Matt. xi. 21, 23; John xviii. 6.) (ii.) Or it
   is of such great efficacy as to render it impossible to be resisted.
   (iii.) Or it is of an efficacy administered in such a way by the wisdom
   of God, as in reality to hinder sin with regard to the event, and with
   certainty according to the foreknowledge of God, although not
   necessarily and inevitably. (Gen. xx. 6.) With respect to the object,
   it is likewise three-fold: for a hindrance is placed either on the
   power, the capability, or the will of a rational creature. (i.) The
   impediment placed on the power, is that by which some act is taken away
   from the power of a rational creature, for the performance of which it
   has an inclination and sufficient powers. This is done by legislation,
   through which it comes to pass that the creature cannot perform that
   act without sin. (Gen. ii. 16, 17.) (ii.) The impediment placed on the
   capability, is that by which this effect is produced, that the creature
   cannot commit the deed, for the performance of which it possesses an
   inclination, and powers which, without this hindrance, would be
   sufficient. But this hindrance is placed on the capability in four
   ways: First. By depriving the creature of the essence and life, which
   are the foundation of capability. (1 Kings 19; 2 Kings 1.) Secondly. By
   the ablation or diminution of capability. (1 Kings xiii. 4; Rom. vi.
   6.) Thirdly. By the opposition of a greater capability, or at least of
   one that is equal. (2 Chron. xxvi. 18-21; Gal. v. 17.) Fourthly. By the
   withdrawing of the object towards which the act tends. (John viii. 59.)
   (iii.) An impediment is placed on the will when, by some argument, it
   is persuaded not to will the perpetration of a sin, whether this
   argument be taken from the impossibility or the difficulty of the
   thing; (Matt. xxi. 46; Hosea ii. 6, 7;) from its unpleasantness or
   inconvenience, its uselessness or injuriousness; (Gen. xxxvii. 26, 27;)
   and, lastly, from its injustice, dishonour, and indecency. (Gen. xxxix.
   8, 9.)

   IV. The Permission of sin is contrary to the hindering of it.

   Yet it is not opposed to hindrance as the latter is an act which is
   taken away from the power of a creature by legislation; for, in this
   case, the same act would be a sin, and not a sin--a sin as it was an
   act forbidden to the power of the creature, and not a sin as being
   permitted, that is not forbidden. But permission is opposed to this
   hindrance, by which an impediment is placed on the power and the will
   of the creature. This permission is a suspension of all impediments,
   that, God knows, if they were employed, would in fact, hinder the sin;
   and it is a necessary result, because sin might be hindered by a single
   impediment of this description. (1.) Sin, therefore, is permitted to
   the power of the creature, when God employs none of those impediments
   which have been mentioned in the third thesis of this disputation: on
   which account, this permission has the following, either as conjoint or
   preceding acts of God. The continuance of essence and life to the
   creature, the preservation of his power, a care that it be not opposed
   by a greater power, or at least by one equal to it, and, lastly, the
   exhibition of the object on which sin is committed. (Exod. ix. 16; John
   xviii. 6; 1 Sam. xx. 31, 32; Matt. xxvi. 2, 53.) (2.) Sin is permitted
   also to the will, not by the suspension of every impediment suitable to
   deter the will from sinning, but by not employing those which in
   reality would hinder, of which kind God must have an immense number in
   the treasures of his wisdom and power.

   V. The foundation of this permission is, (1.) The liberty of choice,
   which God, the Creator, has implanted in his rational creature, and the
   use of which the constancy of the Donor does not suffer to be taken
   away from this creature. (2.) The infinite wisdom and power of God, by
   which He knows and is able to produce good out of evil. (Gen. i. 2, 3;
   2 Cor. iv. 6.) And therefore, God permits that which he does permit,
   not in ignorance of the powers and the inclination of rational
   creatures, for he knows all things; (1 Sam. xxiii. 11, 12;) -not with
   reluctance, for it was in his power, not to have produced a creature
   who possessed freedom of will, and to have destroyed him after he was
   produced; (Rev. iv. 11;) -- not as being incapable of hindering, for
   how can this be attributed to Him who is both omniscient and
   omnipotent? (Jer. xviii. 6; Psalm xciv. 9, 10;) not as an unconcerned
   spectator, or negligent of that which is transacted, because even
   before any thing is done, he has already gone through the various
   actions concerning it, and has, besides, an attentive eye upon it to
   direct and determine to punish or to pardon it. (Psalm lxxxi. 12, 13.)
   But whatever God permits, he permits it designedly and voluntarily, His
   will being immediately concerned about its permission, which permission
   itself is immediately occupied about sin, which order cannot be
   inverted without injury to divine justice and truth. (Psalm v. 4, 5.)

   VI. We must now, with more distinctness, explain, by some of the
   differences of sin, those things which we have spoken thus generally
   about hindering and permitting. (1.) The distinction of sin, from its
   causes, into those of ignorance, infirmity, malignity, and negligence,
   will serve our purpose. For an impediment is placed on a sin of
   ignorance, by the revelation of the divine will; (Psalm cxix. 105;) on
   a sin of infirmity, by the strengthening of the Holy Spirit; (Ephes.
   iii. 16;) on a sin of malignity, by "taking away the stony heart, and
   by bestowing a heart of flesh," (Ezek. xi. 19,) and inscribing on it
   the law of God; (Jer. xxxi. 33;) and on a sin of negligence, by a holy
   solicitude excited in the hearts of believers. (Jer. xxxii. 40.) From
   these, it will be easily evident, in the suspension of which of these
   acts consists the permission of sins under each of the preceding
   classes. (2.) The distinction of sin according to the relation of the
   law which commands the performance of good, and of that which prohibits
   the commission of evil, has also a place in this explanation. For,
   against the prohibitory part, an offense is committed, either by
   performing an act, or from an undue cause and end, omitting its
   performance--against the perceptive part, either by omitting an act, or
   by performing it in an undue manner, and from an undue cause and end.
   To these distinctions also, God's hindering and permitting may be
   adapted. For Joseph's brethren were hindered from killing him; but they
   were induced to omit that act from an undue cause and end. (Gen.
   xxxvii. 26, 27.) Absalom was hindered from following the counsel of
   Ahithophel, which was useful to himself, and hurtful to David; but he
   did not abstain from it through a just cause, and from a good end. (2
   Sam. 17.) God hindered Balaam from cursing the children of Israel, and
   caused him to bless them; but it was in such a manner that he abstained
   from the former act, and performed the latter with an insincere and
   knavish mind. (Num. 23.)

   VII. We shall more correctly understand the reasons and causes both of
   hindering and permitting, if, while distinctly considering in sin the
   act, and the transgression of the law, we apply to each of them the
   divine hindrance and permission. But though, in sin, the act and the
   transgression of the law are inseparably connected, and therefore
   neither can be hindered or permitted without the other; yet they may be
   distinguished in the mind, and God may hinder and permit sometimes with
   regard to the act or to the transgression alone; at other times,
   principally with regard to the one of them or to both, and these his
   acts may become objects of consideration to us. God hindered Elijah
   from being forcibly brought to Ahaziah to be killed, not as that was a
   sin, but as it was an act. This is apparent from the end and the mode
   of hindering. From the end, because it was His will that the life of
   His prophet should be spared, not lest Ahaziah should sin against God.
   From the mode of hindering, because he destroyed two companies, of
   fifty men each, who had been sent to seize him, which was a token of
   divine anger against Ahaziah and the men, by which sin is not usually
   hindered as such, but as it is an act which will prove injurious to
   another: but through Grace, sin is hindered as such. (2 Kings 1.) God
   permitted Joseph to be sold, when he hindered his murder. He permitted
   his vendition, not more as it was a sin than as it was an act; for by
   the sale of Joseph, as it was an act, God obtained his end. (Gen.
   xxxvii. 1, 20; Psalm cv. 17.) But God hindered David from laying
   violent hands on Saul, not so much as it was an act, as in reference to
   its being a sin. This appears from the argument by which David was
   induced to refrain. "The Lord forbid," said he, "that I should stretch
   forth mine hand against the Lord's anointed." (1 Sam. xxiv. 7.) God
   permitted Ahab to kill Naboth, rather as it was a sin than as it was an
   act; for thus Ahab filled up the measure of his iniquities, and
   accelerated the infliction of punishment on himself; for, by some other
   way than this, God could have taken Naboth to himself. (1 Kings 21.)
   But Abimelech was hindered from violating the chastity of Sarah--both
   as it was an act by which indelible grief would have been brought down
   upon Abraham, whom He greatly loved, and as it was a sin; for God was
   unwilling that Abimelech should defile himself with this crime, because
   "in the integrity of his heart," he would have done it. (Gen. xx. 6.)
   On the contrary, God permitted Judah to know Tamar, his
   daughter-in-law--both as an act because God willed to have Christ born
   in direct descent from Judah, and as it was a sin, for it was the will
   of God thus to declare: Nothing is so polluted that it cannot be
   sanctified in Christ Jesus. (Gen. xxxviii. 18.) For it is not in vain
   that Matthew has informed us, that Christ was the Son of Judah by
   Tamar, as he was also the Son of David by the wife of Uriah. (Matt. 1.)
   This matter when diligently considered by us, conduces both to
   illustrate the wisdom of God, and to promote our own profit, if in our
   consciences, we solicitously observe from what acts and in what respect
   we are hindered, and what acts are permitted to us.

   VIII. Beside this permission, there is another efficiency of the
   providence of God concerning the Beginning of Sin, that is, the
   Administration or management of arguments and occasions, which incite
   to an act that cannot be committed by the creature without sin, if not
   through the intention of God, at least according to the inclination of
   the creature, and not seldom according to the events which thence
   arise. (2 Sam. xii. 11, 12; xvi, 21-23.) But these arguments are
   presented either to the mind, (2 Sam. xxiv. 1; 1 Chron. xxi. 1; Psalm
   cv. 25,) or to the senses, both external and internal; (Job 1 & 2; Isa.
   x. 5-7;) and this indeed, either by means of the service or
   intervention of creatures, or by the immediate act of God himself. The
   end of God in this administration is--to try whether it be the will of
   the creature to abstain from sinning, even when it is excited by these
   incentives; (for small praise is due to the act of abstaining, in those
   cases in which such excitements are absent,) and, if it be the will of
   the creature to yield to these alluring attractions, to effect his own
   work by the act of the creature; not impelled by necessity, as if He
   was unable to complete his own work without the aid of the creature;
   but through a desire to demonstrate his manifold wisdom. Consider the
   Arguments by which the brethren of Joseph, through their own malice,
   were incited to will his murder: these were--Joseph's accusation, by
   which he disclosed to his father the deeds of his brethren, the
   peculiar affection which Jacob cherished for Joseph, the sending of a
   dream, and the relation of it. Consider also the Occasions or
   opportunities, the mission of Joseph to his brethren at his father's
   request, and the opportune appearance of the Ishmaelites who were
   traveling into Egypt, (Gen. 37.)

   IX. The last efficiency of God concerning the Beginnings of sin, is the
   divine concurrence, which is necessary to produce every act; because
   nothing whatever can have an entity except from the first and chief
   Being, who immediately produces that entity. The concurrence of God is
   not his in, mediate influx into a second or inferior cause, but it is
   an action of God immediately flowing into the effect of the creature,
   so that the same effect in one and the same entire action may be
   produced simultaneously by God and the creature. Though this
   concurrence is placed in the mere pleasure or will of God, and in his
   free dispensation, yet he never denies it to a rational and free
   creature, when he has permitted an act to his power and will. For these
   two phrases are contradictory, "to grant permission to the power and
   the will of a creature to commit an act," and "to deny the divine
   concurrence without which the act cannot be done." But this concurrence
   is to the act as such, not as it is a sin: And therefore God is at once
   the effector and the permittor of the same act, and the permittor
   before he is the effector. For if it had not been the will of the
   creature to perform such an act, the influx of God would not have been
   upon that act by concurrence. And because the creature cannot perform
   that act without sin, God ought not, on that account, to deny the
   divine concurrence to the creature who is inclined to its performance.
   For it is right and proper that the obedience of the creature should be
   tried, and that he should abstain from an unlawful act and from the
   desire of obeying his own inclinations, not through a deficiency of the
   requisite divine concurrence; because, in this respect, he abstains
   from an act as it is a natural good, but it is the will of God that he
   should refrain from it as it is a moral evil.

   X. The preceding considerations relate to the Beginnings of sin. In
   reference to the Progress of sin, a two-fold efficiency of divine
   providence occurs, direction and determination. The direction of sin is
   an act of divine providence, by which God wisely, justly, and
   powerfully directs sin wherever he wills, "reaching from one end to
   another mightily, and sweetly ordering all things." (Wisdom viii. 1.)
   In the divine direction is likewise contained a leading away from that
   point whither it is not the will of God to direct it. This direction is
   two-fold, unto an object, and unto an end. Direction unto an object is
   when God allows the sin, which he permits, to be borne, not at the
   option of the creature, towards an object which, in any way whatsoever,
   is exposed and liable to the injury of sin; but which he directs to a
   particular object that sometimes has been no part of the sinner's aim
   or intention, or that he has at least not absolutely intended. (Prov.
   xvi, 9; xxi, 1.) Of this we have a signal example in Nebuchadnezzar,
   who, when he had prepared himself to subjugate nations, preferred to
   march against the Jews rather than the Ammonites, through the divine
   administration of his divinations. (Ezek. xxi. 19-22.) Direction unto
   an end is, when God does not allow the sin, which he permits, to be
   conducive to any end which the creature intends; but he uses it for
   that end which he himself wills, whether the creature intend the same
   end, (by which he would not still be excused from sin,) or whether he
   has another purpose which is directly contrary. The vendition of Joseph
   into Egypt, the temptation of Job, and the expedition of the king of
   Assyria against the Jews, afford illustrations of these remarks. (Gen.
   i. 20, 21; Job 1 & 2; Isa. x. 5-12.)

   XI. The determination of sin is an act of divine providence by which
   God places a measure or check on his permission, and a boundary on sin,
   that it may not, at the option and will of the creature, wander in
   infinitum. This mode and boundary are placed by the circumscription of
   the time, and the determination of the magnitude. The circumscription
   of the time is, when the space of time, in which the permitted sin
   could continue, is diminished and circumscribed so as to stop itself.
   (Matt. xxiv. 22.) In this part also, regard must be had to the act as
   such, and to the sin as such. (i.) God places a boundary to the
   duration of the act, when he takes the rod of iniquity from the
   righteous, lest they commit any act unworthy of themselves; (Psalm
   cxxv. 3;) and when "he delivers the godly out of temptation." (2 Pet.
   ii. 9.) (ii.) God places a boundary to the duration of the sin when he
   "hedges up the way of the Israelites with thorns," that they may no
   longer commit idolatry; (Hosea ii. 6, 7;) when "He commands all men
   every where to repent," among "all nations, whom he suffered, in times
   past, to walk in their own ways." (Acts xiv. 16; xvii, 30.) A boundary
   is fixed to the magnitude of sin, when God does not permit sin to
   increase to excess and assume greater strength. This also is done with
   respect to it as an act, or as a sin. (i.) In the former respect, as an
   act, God hindered "the wrath of their enemies from swallowing up" the
   children of Israel, though he had permitted it to rise up against them;
   (Psalm cxxiv. 2, 3;) He permitted "no temptation to seize upon" the
   Corinthians "but such as is common to man;" (1 Cor. x. 13;) He hindered
   the devil from putting forth his hand against the life of Job; (1 & 2;)
   He prevented Shishadk, the king of Egypt, from "destroying" the Jews,
   and permitted him only to subject them to servitude. (2 Chron. xii.
   7-9.) (ii.) In respect to it as a sin, God hindered David from
   contaminating himself with the blood of Nabal and his domestics. which
   he had sworn to shed, and with whom he was then in a state of
   contention. (1 Sam. xxv. 22, 26.) He also prevented David from going
   forth to battle in company with the army of Achish, (xxvii, 2; xxix, 6,
   7,) to whom he had fled, and "before whom he had reigned himself mad,"
   (xxi, 13,) thus, at the same time he hindered him from destroying his
   own countrymen, the Israelites, and from bringing disasters on the army
   of Achish. For he could have done neither of these things without the
   most flagrant wickedness; though the sin, also, as an act, seems thus
   to have been hindered.

   XII. On account of this divine permission, the offering of arguments
   and opportunities in addition to permission, also on account of this
   direction, determination, and divine concurrence, God is said himself
   to do those evils which are perpetrated by men and by Satan: To have
   sent Joseph down into Egypt, (Gen. xlv. 8,) -- to have taken the
   property of Job, (1 & 2,) -- to have done openly "and before the sun"
   what David had perpetrated "secretly" against Uriah. (2 Sam. xii. 11,
   12; 16.) This mode of speech is adopted for the following reasons: (i.)
   Because the principal parts, in the actions which are employed to
   produce such effects, belong to God himself. (ii.) Because the effects
   and issues, which result from all these, even from actions performed by
   the creature, are not so much in accordance with the intention of the
   creatures themselves, as with the purpose of God. (Isa. x. 5-7.) (iii.)
   Because the wisdom of God knows, if an administration of this kind be
   employed by him, that will certainly arise, or ensue, which cannot be
   perpetuated by the creature without wickedness; and because His will
   decrees to employ this administration. (1 Sam. xxiii. 11-13.) (iv.) A
   fourth reason may be added--Because God, who is the universal cause,
   moves into the effect with a stronger influence than the creature does,
   whose entire efficacy depends upon God.

   XIII. Lastly, follows the efficiency of divine providence concerning
   sin already perpetrated; which consists in its punishment and
   remission. This efficiency is occupied about sin as it is such: For sin
   is punished and pardoned as it is an evil, and because it is an evil.
   (1.) The Punishment of sin is an act of the providence of God, by which
   sin is repaid with the punishment that is due to it according to the
   justice of God. This punishment either belongs to the present life, or
   to that which is to come. (i.) The latter is the eternal separation of
   the whole man from God, and his anguish and torture in the lake of
   fire. (Matt. xxv. 41; Rev. xx. 15.) (ii.) The punishment inflicted in
   this life, is either corporal or spiritual. Those chastisements which
   relate to the body, and to the state of the animal life, are various;
   but the enumeration of them is not necessary for our purpose. But
   spiritual punishment must be diligently considered; which is such a
   punishment of a previous sin, as to be also the cause of other
   subsequent sins, through the malice of him on whom it is inflicted. It
   is a privation of grace, and a delivering up to the power of evil. But
   Privation is either that of habitual grace, or that of assisting grace.
   The former is through the blinding of the mind, and the hardening of
   the heart. (Isa. vi. 9, 10.) The latter is the withdrawing of the
   assistance of the Holy Spirit, who is wont, inwardly "to help our
   infirmities," (Rom. viii, 26,) and outwardly to repress the temptations
   of Satan and the world both on the right hand and on the left; in this
   holy service, he also engages the ministry and the care of good angels.
   (Heb. i. 14; Psalm xci. 11.) A Delivering Up to the power of evil is,
   either "giving sinners over to a reprobate mind" and to the efficacy of
   error, (Rom. i. 28; 2 Thess. ii. 9-11,) or to the desires of the flesh
   and to the lusts of sin, (Rom. i. 24,) or lastly to the power of Satan,
   "the god of this world," (2 Cor. iv. 4,) "who worketh powerfully in the
   children of disobedience." (Ephes. ii. 2.) But because from this
   punishment arise many other sins, and this not only according to the
   certain knowledge of God, by which He knows that if He thus punishes,
   they will thence arise, but likewise according to his purpose by which
   He resolves thus to punish--hence occur the following expressions: "I
   will harden the heart of Pharaoh," &c. (Exod. iv. 21; vii, 4.)
   "Notwithstanding, the sons of Eli harkened not unto the voice of their
   father, because it was the will of the Lord to slay them." (1 Sam. ii.
   25.) "But Amaziah would not hearken to the answer of Joash, king of
   Israel; for it came of God, that he might deliver them into the hand of
   their enemies, because they sought after the gods of Edom." (2 Chron.
   xxv. 20.) This consideration distinguishes the governance of God
   concerning sins, so far as it is occupied concerning either those
   sinners who are hardened, or those who are not hardened.

   XIV. (2.) The Pardon or remission of sin is an act of the Providence of
   God, by which the guilt of sin is forgiven, and the punishment due to
   sin on account of its guilt is taken away. As this remission restores,
   to the favour of God, the man who had previously been an enemy; so it
   also causes the Divine administration respecting him to be afterwards
   entirely gracious, so far as equity and justice require. That is,
   through this pardon, he is free from those spiritual punishments which
   have been enumerated in the preceding Thesis; (Psalm ii. 10-12;) and
   though not exempt from corporal chastisements, yet he is not visited
   with them through the anger of God as the punisher of sin, but only
   through the desire of God thus to declare that He hates sin, and
   besides so to chastise as to deter the sinner from again falling into
   it. (2 Sam. xii. 11-13.) For which reason, the government of Providence
   with regard to this man is entirely different from that under which he
   remained before he obtained remission. (Psalm cxix. 67; 1 Cor. xi. 32;
   Psalm xxxii. 1, 6.) This consideration is exceedingly useful for
   producing in man a solicitous care and a diligent endeavour to obtain
   grace from God, which may not only be sufficient to preserve him in
   future from sinning but which may likewise be so administered by the
   gracious Providence of God, as God knows to be best fitted to keep him
   in the very act from sin.

   XV. This is the efficiency of Divine Providence concerning sin, which
   cannot be accused of the least injustice. (1.) For with respect to the
   Hindering Of Sin, that which is employed by God is sufficient in its
   own nature to hinder, and by which it is the duty of the creature to be
   hindered from sin, by which also he might actually be hindered unless
   he offered resistance and failed of the proffered grace. But God is not
   bound to employ all the methods which are possible to Him for the
   hindrance of sin. (Rom. 1 and 2; Isa. v. 4; Matt. xi. 21-23.) (2.) But
   the cause of sin cannot be ascribed to the Divine Permission. Not the
   efficient cause; for it is a suspension of the Divine efficiency. Not
   the deficient cause; for it pre-supposed, that man had a capability not
   to commit sin, by the aid of Divine grace, which is either near and
   ready; or if it be wanting, it is removed to a distance by the fault of
   the man himself. (3.) The Presenting of Arguments and Occasions does
   not cause sin, unless, per accidens, accidentally. For it is
   administered in such a manner, as to allow the creature not only the
   spontaneous but also the free use of his own motions and actions. But
   God is perfectly at liberty in this manner to try the obedience of his
   creature. (3.) Neither can injustice be ascribed with any propriety to
   The Divine Concurrence. For there is no reason in existence why God
   ought to deny his concurrence to that act which, on account of the
   precept imposed, cannot be committed by the creature without sin; (Gen.
   ii. 16, 17;) which concurrence God would grant to the same act of the
   creature, if a law had not been made. (5.) Direction and Determination
   have no difficulty. (6.) Punishment and Pardon have in them manifest
   equity, even that punishment which contains blinding and hardening;
   since God is not wont to inflict it except for the deep demerit and the
   almost desperate contumacy of his intelligent creature. (Isa. vi. 7;
   Rom. 1; 2 Thess. 2, 9-12.)
     __________________________________________________________________

  DISPUTATION 11

  ON THE FREE WILL OF MAN AND ITS POWERS

  RESPONDENT: PAUL LEONARDS

   I. The word, arbitrium, "choice," or "free will," properly signifies
   both the faculty of the mind or understanding, by which the mind is
   enabled to judge about any thing proposed to it, and the judgment
   itself which the mind forms according to that faculty. But it is
   transferred from the Mind to the Will on account of the very close
   connection which subsists between them. Liberty, when attributed to the
   will, is properly an affection of the will, though it has its root in
   the understanding and reason. Generally considered, it is various. (1.)
   It is a Freedom from the control or jurisdiction of one who commands,
   and from an obligation to render obedience. (2.) From the inspection,
   care, and government of a superior. (3.) It is also a freedom from
   necessity, whether this proceeds from an external cause compelling, or
   from a nature inwardly determining absolutely to one thing. (4.) It is
   a freedom from sin and its dominion. (5.) And a freedom from misery.

   II. Of these five modes of liberty, the first two appertain to God
   alone; to whom also on this account, autexousia perfect independence,
   or complete freedom of action, is attributed. But the remaining three
   modes may belong to man, nay in a certain respect they do pertain to
   him. And, indeed, the former, namely, freedom from necessity always
   pertains to him because it exists naturally in the will, as its proper
   attribute, so that there cannot be any will if it be not free. The
   freedom from misery, which pertains to man when recently created and
   not then fallen into sin, will again pertain to him when he shall be
   translated in body and soul into celestial blessedness. But about these
   two modes also, of freedom from necessity and from misery, we have here
   no dispute. It remains, therefore, for us, to discuss that which is a
   freedom from sin and its dominion, and which is the principal
   controversy of these times.

   III. It is therefore asked, is there within man a freedom of will from
   sin and its dominion, and how far does it extend? Or rather, what are
   the powers of the whole man to understand, to will, and to do that
   which is good? To return an appropriate answer to this question, the
   distinction of a good object, and the diversity of men's conditions,
   must both enter into our consideration. The Good Things presented to
   man are three, natural, which he has in common with many other
   creatures; animal, which belong to him as a man; and spiritual, which
   are also deservedly called Celestial or Divine, and which are
   consentaneous to him as being a partaker of the Divine Nature. The
   States, or Conditions are likewise three, that of primitive innocence,
   in which God placed him by creation; that of subsequent corruption,
   into which he fell through sin when destitute of primitive innocence;
   and, lastly, that of renewed righteousness, to which state he is
   restored by the grace of Christ.

   IV. But because it is of little importance to our present purpose to
   investigate what may be the powers of free will to understand, to will,
   and to do natural and animal good things; we will omit them, and enter
   on the consideration of spiritual good, that concerns the spiritual
   life of man, which he is bound to live according to godliness,
   inquiring from the Scriptures what powers man possesses, while he is in
   the way of this animal life, to understand, to will, and to do
   spiritual good things, which alone are truly good and pleasing to God.
   In this inquiry the office of a Director will be performed by a
   consideration of the three states, of which we have already treated, [
   3,] varied as such consideration must be in the relation of these
   powers to the change of each state.

   V. In the state of Primitive Innocence, man had a mind endued with a
   clear understanding of heavenly light and truth concerning God, and his
   works and will, as far as was sufficient for the salvation of man and
   the glory of God; he had a heart imbued with "righteousness and true
   holiness," and with a true and saving love of good; and powers
   abundantly qualified or furnished perfectly to fulfill the law which
   God had imposed on him. This admits easily of proof, from the
   description of the image of God, after which man is said to have been
   created, (Gen. i. 26, 27,) from the law divinely imposed on him, which
   had a promise and a threat appended to it, (ii, 17,) and lastly from
   the analogous restoration of the same image in Christ Jesus. (Ephes.
   iv. 24, Col. iii. 10.)

   VI. But man was not so confirmed in this state of innocence, as to be
   incapable of being moved, by the representation presented to him of
   some good, (whether it was of an inferior kind and relating to this
   animal life, or of a superior-kind and relating to spiritual life,)
   inordinately and unlawfully to look upon it and to desire it, and of
   his own spontaneous as well as free motion, and through a preposterous
   desire for that good, to decline from the obedience which had been
   prescribed to him. Nay, having turned away from the light of his own
   mind and his chief good, which is God, or, at least, having turned
   towards that chief good not in the manner in which he ought to have
   done, and besides having turned in mind and heart towards an inferior
   good, he transgressed the command given to him for life. By this foul
   deed, he precipitated himself from that noble and elevated condition
   into a state of the deepest infelicity, which is Under The Dominion of
   Sin. For "to whom any one yields himself a servant to obey," (Rom. vi.
   16,) and "of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in
   bondage," and is his regularly assigned slave. (2 Pet. ii. 19.)

   VII. In this state, the free will of man towards the true good is not
   only wounded, maimed, infirm, bent, and weakened; but it is also
   imprisoned, destroyed, and lost. And its powers are not only
   debilitated and useless unless they be assisted by grace, but it has no
   powers whatever except such as are excited by Divine grace. For Christ
   has said, "Without me ye can do nothing." St. Augustine, after having
   diligently meditated upon each word in this passage, speaks thus:
   "Christ does not say, without me ye can do but Little; neither does He
   say, without me ye can do any Arduous Thing, nor without me ye can do
   it with difficulty. But he says, without me ye can do Nothing! Nor does
   he say, without me ye cannot complete any thing; but without me ye can
   do Nothing." That this may be made more manifestly to appear, we will
   separately consider the mind, the affections or will, and the
   capability, as contra-distinguished from them, as well as the life
   itself of an unregenerate man.

   VIII. The mind of man, in this state, is dark, destitute of the saving
   knowledge of God, and, according to the Apostle, incapable of those
   things which belong to the Spirit of God. For "the animal man has no
   perception of the things of the Spirit of God;" (1 Cor. ii. 14;) in
   which passage man is called "animal," not from the animal body, but
   from anima, the soul itself, which is the most noble part of man, but
   which is so encompassed about with the clouds of ignorance, as to be
   distinguished by the epithets of "vain" and "foolish;" and men
   themselves, thus darkened in their minds, are denominated "mad" or
   foolish, "fools," and even "darkness" itself. (Rom. i. 21, 22; Ephes.
   iv. 17, 18; Tit. iii. 3; Ephes. v. 8.) This is true, not only when,
   from the truth of the law which has in some measure been inscribed on
   the mind, it is preparing to form conclusions by the understanding; but
   likewise when, by simple apprehension, it would receive the truth of
   the gospel externally offered to it. For the human mind judges that to
   be "foolishness" which is the most excellent "wisdom" of God. (1 Cor.
   i. 18, 24.) On this account, what is here said must be understood not
   only of practical understanding and the judgment of particular
   approbation, but also of theoretical understanding and the judgment of
   general estimation.

   IX. To the darkness of the mind succeeds the perverseness of the
   affections and of the heart, according to which it hates and has an
   aversion to that which is truly good and pleasing to God; but it loves
   and pursues what is evil. The Apostle was unable to afford a more
   luminous description of this perverseness, than he has given in the
   following words: "The carnal mind is enmity against God. For it is not
   subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be. So then, they that
   are in the flesh cannot please God." (Rom. viii. 7.) For this reason,
   the human heart itself is very often called deceitful and perverse,
   uncircumcised, hard and stony." (Jer. xiii. 10; xvii, 9; Ezek. xxxvi.
   26.) Its imagination is said to be "only evil from his very youth;"
   (Gen. vi. 5; viii, 21;) and "out of the heart proceed evil thoughts,
   murders, adulteries," &c. (Matt. xv. 19.)

   X. Exactly correspondent to this darkness of the mind, and perverseness
   of the heart, is the utter weakness of all the powers to perform that
   which is truly good, and to omit the perpetration of that which is
   evil, in a due mode and from a due end and cause. The subjoined sayings
   of Christ serve to describe this impotence. "A corrupt tree cannot
   bring forth good fruit." (Matt. vii. 18.) "How can ye, being evil,
   speak good things?" (xii, 34.) The following relates to the good which
   is properly prescribed in the gospel: "No man can come to me, except
   the Father draw him." (John vi. 44.) As do likewise the following words
   of the Apostle: "The carnal mind is not subject to the law of God,
   neither indeed can be;" (Rom. viii. 7;) therefore, that man over whom
   it has dominion, cannot perform what the law commands. The same Apostle
   says, "When we were in the flesh, the motions of sins wrought in us,"
   or flourished energetically. (vii, 5.) To the same purpose are all
   those passages in which the man existing in this state is said to be
   under the power of sin and Satan, reduced to the condition of a slave,
   and "taken captive by the Devil." (Rom. vi. 20; 2 Tim. ii. 26.)

   XI. To these let the consideration of the whole of the life of man who
   is placed under sin, be added, of which the Scriptures exhibit to us
   the most luminous descriptions; and it will be evident, that nothing
   can be spoken more truly concerning man in this state, than that he is
   altogether dead in sin. (Rom. iii. 10-19.) To these let the testimonies
   of Scripture be joined, in which are described the benefits of Christ,
   which are conferred by his Spirit on the human mind and will, and thus
   on the whole man. (1 Cor. vi. 9-11; Gal. v. 19-25; Ephes. ii. 2-7; iv,
   17-20; Tit. iii. 3-7.) For, the blessings of which man has been
   deprived by sin, cannot be rendered more obviously apparent, than by
   the immense mass of benefits which accrue to believers through the Holy
   Spirit; when, in truth, nature is understood to be devoid of all that
   which, as the Scriptures testify, is performed in man and communicated
   by the operation of the Holy Spirit. Therefore, if "where the Spirit of
   the Lord is, there is liberty;" (2 Cor. iii. 17;) and if those alone be
   free indeed whom the Son hath made free;" (John viii. 36;) it follows,
   that our will is not free from the first fall; that is, it is not free
   to good, unless it be made free by the Son through his Spirit.

   XII. But far different from this is the consideration of the free will
   of man, as constituted in the third state of Renewed Righteousness. For
   when a new light and knowledge of God and Christ, and of the Divine
   will, have been kindled in his mind; and when new affections,
   inclinations and motions agreeing with the law of God, have been
   excited in his heart, and new powers have been produced in him; it
   comes to pass, that, being liberated from the kingdom of darkness, and
   being now made "light in the Lord," (Ephes. v. 8,) he understands the
   true and saving good; that, after the hardness of his stony heart has
   been changed into the softness of flesh, and the law of God according
   to the covenant of grace has been inscribed on it, (Jer. 31, 32-35,) he
   loves and embraces that which is good, just, and holy; and that, being
   made capable in Christ, co-operating now with God, he prosecutes the
   good which he knows and loves, and he begins himself to perform it in
   deed. But this, whatever it may be of knowledge, holiness and power, is
   all begotten within him by the Holy Spirit; who is, on this account,
   called "the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, of counsel and might,
   of knowledge and the fear of Jehovah," (Isa. xi. 2,) "the Spirit of
   grace," (Zech. xii. 10,) "of faith," (2 Cor. iv. 13,) "the Spirit of
   adoption" into sons, (Rom. viii. 16,) and "the Spirit of holiness;" and
   to whom the acts of illumination, regeneration, renovation, and
   confirmation, are attributed in the Scriptures.

   XIII. But two things must be here observed. The First that this work of
   regeneration and illumination is not completed in one moment; but that
   it is advanced and promoted, from time to time, by daily increase. For
   "our old man is crucified, that the body of sin might be destroyed,"
   (Rom. vi. 6,) and "that the inward man may be renewed day by day." (2
   Cor. iv. 16.) For this reason, in regenerate persons, as long as they
   inhabit these mortal bodies, "the flesh lusteth against the Spirit."
   (Gal. v. 17.) Hence it arises, that they can neither perform any good
   thing without great resistance and violent struggles, nor abstain from
   the commission of evil. Nay, it also happens, that, either through
   ignorance or infirmity, and sometimes through perverseness, they sin,
   as we may see in the cases of Moses, Aaron, Barnabas, Peter and David.
   Neither is such an occurrence only accidental; but, even in those who
   are the most perfect, the following Scriptures have their fulfillment:
   "In many things we all offend;" (James iii. 9;) and "There is no man
   that sinneth not." (1 Kings viii. 46.)

   XIV. The Second thing to be observed is, that as the very first
   commencement of every good thing, so likewise the progress, continuance
   and confirmation, nay, even the perseverance in good, are not from
   ourselves, but from God through the Holy Spirit. For "he who hath begun
   a good work in you, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ;"
   (Phil. i. 6;) and "we are kept by the power of God through faith." (1
   Pet. i. 5.) "The God of all grace makes us perfect, stablishes,
   strengthens and settles us." (i, 10.) But if it happens that persons
   fall into sin who have been born again, they neither repent nor rise
   again unless they be raised up again by God through the power of his
   Spirit, and be renewed to repentance. This is proved in the most
   satisfactory manner, by the example of David and of Peter. "Every good
   and perfect gift, therefore, is from above, and cometh down from the
   Father of lights," (James i. 17,) by whose power the dead are animated
   that they may live, the fallen are raised up that they may recover
   themselves, the blind are illuminated that they may see, the unwilling
   are incited that they may become willing, the weak are confirmed that
   they may stand, the willing are assisted that they may work and may
   co-operate with God. "To whom be praise and glory in the church, by
   Christ Jesus, throughout all ages, world without end. Amen!"
   "Subsequent or following grace does indeed assist the good purpose of
   man; but this good purpose would have no existence unless through
   preceding or preventing grace. And though the desire of man, which is
   called good, be assisted by grace when it begins to be; yet it does not
   begin without grace, but is inspired by Him, concerning whom the
   Apostle writes thus, thanks be to God, who put the same earnest care
   into the heart of Titus for you. If God incites any one to have an
   earnest care' for others, He will put it into the heart' of some other
   person to have an earnest care' for him." Augustinus, Contra. 2 Epist.
   Pelag. l. 2. c. 9.

   "What then, you ask, does free will do? I reply with brevity, it saves.
   Take away FREE WILL, and nothing will be left to be saved. Take away
   GRACE, and nothing will be left as the source of salvation. This work
   [of salvation] cannot be effected without two parties--one, from whom
   it may come: the other, to whom or in whom it may be wrought. God is
   the author of salvation. Free will is only capable of being saved. No
   one, except God, is able to bestow salvation; and nothing, except free
   will, is capable of receiving it." Bernardus, De Libero Arbit. et
   Gratia.
     __________________________________________________________________

  DISPUTATION 12

  THE LAW OF GOD

  RESPONDENT: DIONYSIUS SPRANCKHUYSEN

   I. Law in general is defined, either from its End, "an ordinance of
   right reason for the common and particular good of all and of each of
   those who are subordinate to it, enacted by Him who has the care of the
   whole community, and, in it, that of each individual." Or from its Form
   and its Efficacy, "an ordinance commanding what must be done, and what
   omitted; it is enacted by Him, who possesses the right of requiring
   obedience; and it binds to obedience a creature who abounds in the use
   of reason and the exercise of liberty, by the sacred promise of a
   reward and by the denunciation of a punishment." It is likewise
   distinguished into Human and Divine. A Divine law has God for its
   author, a Human law has man for its author; not that any law enacted by
   man is choice and good, which may not be referred to God, the author of
   every good; but because men deduce from the Divine law such precepts as
   are accommodated to the state of which they have the charge and
   oversight, according to its particular condition and circumstances. At
   present we will treat upon the Divine law.

   II. The Divine law may be considered, either as it is impressed on the
   minds of men by the engrafted word; (Rom. ii. 14, 15;) as it is
   communicated by words audibly pronounced, (Gal. ii. 17,) or as it is
   comprised in writing. (Exod. xxxiv. 1.) These modes of legislation do
   not differ in their entire objects: but they may admit of
   discrimination in this way, the first seems to serve as a kind of
   foundation to the rest; but the two others extend themselves further,
   even to those things which are commanded and forbidden. We will now
   treat upon the law of God which is comprised in writing; and which is
   also called "the law of Moses;" because God used him as a mediator to
   deliver it to the children of Israel. (Mal. iv. 4; Gal. iii. 19.) But
   it is three-fold according to the variety of the object, that is, of
   the works to be performed. The first is called the Ethical, or Moral
   Law: (Exod. 20.) The second, the Sacred or Ceremonial. The third the
   Political, Judicial or Forensic Law.

   III. The Moral Law is distributed through the whole of the Scriptures
   of the Old and New Testament, and is summarily contained in the
   Decalogue. It is an ordinance that commands those things which God
   accounts grateful of themselves, and which it is his will to be
   performed by all men at all times and in all places; and that forbids
   the contrary things. (1 Sam. xv. 22; Amos v. 21-24; Micah vi. 6-8.) It
   is therefore the perpetual and immutable rule of living, the express
   image of the internal Divine conception; according to which, God, the
   great lawgiver, judges it right and equitable that a rational creature
   should always and in every place order and direct the whole of his
   life. It is briefly contained in the love God and of our neighbour;
   (Matt. xxii. 36-39;) whether partly consisting of those services which
   relate to the love, honour, fear, and worship of God; (Mal. i. 6;) or
   partly consisting of those duties which we owe to our neighbours,
   superiors, inferiors, and equals: (Rom. 12,13, & 14;) in the wide
   circle of which are also comprehended those things which every man is
   bound to perform to himself. (Tit. ii. 11, 12.)

   IV. The uses of the moral law are various, according to the different
   conditions of man. (1.) The primary use, and that which was of itself
   intended by God according to his love for righteousness and for his
   creatures, was, that man by it might be quickened or made alive, that
   is, that he might perform it, and by its performance might be
   justified, and might "of debt" receive the reward which was promised
   through it. (Rom. ii. 13; x, 5; iv, 4.) And this use was accommodated
   to the primitive state of man, when sin had not yet entered into the
   world. (2.) The first use in order of the moral law, under a state of
   sin, is AGAINST man as a sinner, not only that it may accuse him of
   transgression and guilt, and may subject him to the wrath of God and
   condemnation; (Rom. iii. 19, 20;) but that it may likewise convince him
   of his utter inability to resist sin and to subject himself to the law.
   (Rom. 7.) Since God has been pleased mercifully and graciously to treat
   with sinful man, the next use of the law TOWARDS the sinner is, that it
   may compel him who is thus convicted and subjected to condemnation, to
   desire and seek the grace of God, and that it may force him to flee to
   Christ either as the promised or as the imparted deliverer. (Gal. ii.
   16, 17.) Besides, in this state of sin, the moral law is serviceable,
   not only to God, that, by the dread of punishment and the promise of
   temporal rewards, he may restrain men under its guidance at least from
   the outward work of sin and from flagrant crimes; (1 Tim. i. 9, 10;)
   but it is also serviceable to Sin, when dwelling and reigning in a
   carnal man who is under the law, that it may inflame the desire of sin,
   may increase sin, and may "work within him all manner of
   concupiscence." (Rom. vi. 12-14; vii, 5, 8, 11, 13.) In the former
   case, God employs the law through his goodness and his love for civil
   and social intercourse among mankind. In the latter case, it is
   employed through the malice of sin which reigns and has the dominion.

   V. (3.) The third use of the moral law is towards a man, as now born
   again by the Spirit of God and of Christ, and is agreeable to the state
   of grace, that it may be a perpetual rule for directing his life in a
   godly and spiritual manner: (Tit. iii. 8; James ii. 8.) Not that man
   may be justified; because for this purpose it is rendered "weak through
   the flesh" and useless, even if man had committed only a single sin:
   (Rom. viii. 3.) But that he may render thanks to God for his gracious
   redemption and sanctification, (Psalm cxvi. 12, 13,) that he may
   preserve a good conscience, (1 Tim. i. 19,) that he may make his
   calling and election sure, (2 Pet. i. 10,) that he may by his example
   win over other persons to Christ, (1 Pet. iii. 1,) that he may confound
   the devil, (Job 1 & 2,) that he may condemn the ungodly world, (Heb.
   xi. 7,) and that through the path of good works he may march towards
   the heavenly inheritance and glory, (Rom. ii. 7,) and that he may not
   only himself glorify God, (1 Cor. vi. 20,) but may also furnish
   occasion and matter to others for glorifying his Father who is in
   Heaven. (Matt. v. 16.)

   VI. From these uses it is easy to collect how far the moral law obtains
   among believers and those who are placed under the grace of Christ, and
   how far it is abrogated. (1.) It is abrogated with regard to its power
   and use in justifying:

   "For if there had been a law given which could have given life, verily
   righteousness should have been by that law." (Gal. iii. 21.) The reason
   why "it cannot give life," is, "because it is weak through the flesh:"
   (Rom. viii. 3) God, therefore, willing to deal graciously with men,
   gave the promise and Christ himself, that the inheritance through the
   promise and by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that
   believe. But the law which came after the promise, could neither "make
   the latter of none effect," (for it was sanctioned by authority,) nor
   could it be joined or super-added to the promise, that out of this
   union righteousness and life might be given. (Gal. iii. 16-18, 22.)
   (2.) It is abrogated with regard to the curse and condemnation: For
   "Christ, being made a curse for us, hath redeemed us from the curse of
   the law;" (Gal. iii. 10-13;) and thus the law is taken away from sin,
   lest its "strength" should be to condemn. (1 Cor. xv. 55, 56.) (3.) The
   law is abrogated and taken away from sin, so far as "sin, having taken
   occasion by the law, works all manner of concupiscence" in the carnal
   man, over whom sin exercises dominion. (Rom. vii. 4-8.) (4.) It is
   abrogated, with regard to the guidance by which it urged man to do good
   and to refrain from evil, through a fear of punishment and a hope of
   temporal reward. (1 Tim. i. 9, 10; Gal. iv. 18.) For believers and
   regenerate persons "are become dead to the law by the body of Christ,"
   that they may be the property of another, even of Christ; by whose
   Spirit they are led and excited in newness of life, according to love
   and the royal law of liberty. (1 John v. 3, 4; James ii. 8.) Whence it
   appears, that the law is not abrogated with respect to the obedience
   which must be rendered to God; for though obedience be required under
   the grace of Christ and of the Gospel, it is required according to
   clemency, and not according to strict [legal] rigor. (1 John iii. 1,
   2.)

   VII. The Ceremonial Law is that which contains the precepts concerning
   the outward worship of God; which was delivered to the Jewish church,
   and was accommodated to the times in which the church of God was "as a
   child" under "the promise" and the Old Testament. (Gal. iv. 1-3.) It
   was instituted not only to typify, to prefigure and to bear witness by
   sealing; (Heb. viii. 5; x, 1;) but likewise for the discipline, or good
   order which was to be observed in ecclesiastical meetings and acts.
   (Col. ii. 14; Psalm xxvii. 4.) Subservient to the former purpose were
   circumcision, the Pascal Lamb, sacrifices, sabbaths, sprinklings,
   washings, purifications, consecrations and dedications of living
   creatures. (Col. ii. 11; 1 Cor. v. 7.) To the latter purpose, [that of
   church discipline,] were the distinct functions of the Priests, the
   Levites, the Singers, and the porters, or door-keepers, the courses or
   changes in their several duties, and the circumstances of the places
   and times in which these sacred acts were to be severally performed. (1
   Chron. 24, 25, & 26.)

   VIII. The use of this ceremonial law was, (1.) That it might retain
   that ancient people under the hope and expectation of the good things
   which had been promised. (Heb. x. 1- 3.) This use it fulfilled by
   various types, figures and shadows of persons, things, actions, and
   events; (7, 9, & 10;) by which not only were sins testified as in "a
   hand-writing which was against them," (Col. ii. 14,) that the necessity
   of the promise which had been given might be understood; but likewise
   the expiation and promised good things were shewn at a distance, that
   they might believe the promise would assuredly be fulfilled. (Heb. ix.
   8-10; Col. ii. 17; Heb. x. 1.) And in this respect, since the body and
   express form of those types and shadows relate to Christ, the
   ceremonial law is deservedly called "a school-master [to bring the
   Jews] unto Christ." (Gal. iii. 24.) (2.) That it might distinguish from
   other nations the Children of Israel, as a people sanctified to God on
   a peculiar account, and that it might separate them as "a middle wall
   of partition;" (Ephes. ii. 14, 15;) yet so as that even strangers might
   be admitted to a participation in it by circumcision. (Exod. xii. 44;
   Acts ii. 10.) (3.) That while occupied in this course of operas
   religious services, they might not invent and fabricate other modes of
   worship, nor assume such as were in use among other nations; and thus
   they were preserved pure from idolatry and superstition, to which they
   had the greatest propensity, and for which occasions were offered on
   every side by those nations who were contiguous, as well as by those
   who dwelt amongst them. (Deut. 12; xxxi, 16, 27-29.)

   IX. The ceremonial law was abrogated by the cross, the death and the
   resurrection of Christ, by his ascension into heaven and the mission of
   the Holy Ghost, by the sun's dispersion of the shadows, and by the
   entrance of "the body which is of Christ" into their place, (Col. ii.
   11, 12, 14, 17,) which is the full completion of all the types. (Heb.
   viii. 1-6.) But the gradations to be observed in its abrogation must
   come under our consideration: In the first moment it was abrogated with
   regard to the necessity and utility of its observance, every obligatory
   right being at once and together taken from it: in that instant it
   ceased to live, and became dead. (Gal. iv. 9, 10; 1 Cor. vii. 19; ix,
   19, 20; 2 Cor. iii. 13- 16.) Afterwards it was actually to be
   abolished. This was ejected partly, by the teaching of the Apostles
   among believers, who by degrees understood "Christ to be the end of the
   law," and of that which was then abolished; they abstained therefore
   voluntarily from the use of that law. Its abolition was also ejected in
   part, by the power of God, in the destruction of Jerusalem and of the
   temple, in which was the seat of religion, and the place appointed for
   performing those religious observances, against the contumacy of the
   unbelieving Jews. From this period the legal ceremonies began to be
   mortiferous, though in the intermediate space [which had elapsed
   between the death of Christ and the destruction of Jerusalem,] these
   rites, even in the judgment of the apostles themselves, might be
   tolerated, but only among the Jews, and with a proviso, that they
   should not be imposed on the Gentiles: (Acts xvi. 3; xv, 28; xxi,
   21-26; Gal. ii. 3, 11, 12;) which toleration must itself be considered
   as being tantamount to a new institution.

   X. The Judicial Law is that which God prescribed by Moses to the
   Children of Israel, of whom He was in a peculiar manner the king.
   (Exod. 21, 22, 23, &c.) It contained precepts about the form of the
   political government to be exercised in civil society, for procuring
   the benefit both of natural and spiritual life, by the preservation and
   exaction of the outward worship and of the external discipline
   commanded in moral and ceremonial law, such as concerned magistrates,
   contracts, division of property, judgments, punishments, &c. (Deut.
   xvii. 15.) These laws may appropriately be referred to two kinds: (1.)
   Some of them, with regard to their substance are of general obligation,
   though with regard to some circumstances they are peculiar to the
   Jewish commonwealth. (2.) Others belong simply to a particular right or
   authority. (Deut. xv. 1, 2; vi, 19.)

   XI. The uses of this judicial law also were three: (1.) That the whole
   community of the Children of Israel might be regulated by a certain
   rule of public equity and justice; that it might be "as a city that is
   compact together," (Psalm cxxii. 3,) [or as a body] "which is knit
   together" according to all and each of its parts," "by the joints and
   sinews" of the precepts prescribed in this law. (2.) That the
   Israelites might, by this law, be distinguished from other nations who
   had their own laws. Thus was it the will of God, that this his people
   should have nothing in common with other nations, wherever this was
   possible according to the nature of things and of man himself. These
   two uses related to the existing condition of the Jewish commonwealth.
   (3.) It had reference to future things, and was typical of them For all
   that state, and the whole kingdom and its administration, the chiefs of
   administration, the judges and kings, prefigured Christ and his
   kingdom, and its spiritual administration. Psalm 2; Ezek. xxxiv. 23,
   24.) In this respect also the judicial law may be called "a
   schoolmaster [to bring the Jews] to Christ."

   XII. This law, so far as it had regard to Christ, was universally
   abrogated. No kingdom, no nation, no administration, serves now
   typically to figure Christ and his kingdom or administration. For his
   kingdom, which is the kingdom of heaven and not of this world, has
   already come, and he has come into his kingdom. (Matt. iii. 2;xvi, 28;
   John xviii. 36; Matt. xi. 11.) But with respect to its simple
   observance, this Judicial Law is neither forbidden nor prescribed to
   any people, nor is it of absolute necessity to be either observed or
   omitted. Those matters are accepted which are of universal obligation,
   and founded in natural equity. For it is necessary, that they be
   strictly observed, in every place and by all persons. And those things
   [in the judicial law] which relate to Christ as it respects the very
   substance and principal end, cannot be lawfully used by any nation.

   COROLLARY

   The doctrine of the Papists respecting Councils and of Works of
   Supererogation, derogates from the perfection of the Divine commands.
     __________________________________________________________________

  DISPUTATION 13

  ON THE COMPARISON OF THE LAW AND THE GOSPEL

  RESPONDENT: PETER CUNUS

   I. Since the law ought to be considered in two respects, not only as it
   was originally delivered to men constituted in primitive innocence, but
   also as it was given to Moses and imposed on sinners, (on which account
   it has in the Scriptures obtained the name of "the Old Testament," or
   "the Old Covenant,") it may very properly, according to this two-fold
   respect, be compared with the Gospel, which has received the
   appellation of "the New Testament" as it is opposed to the Old. This
   may be done in reference both to their agreement and their difference;
   indeed, it would-be inconvenient for us to take their agreement
   generally into consideration without their difference, lest we should
   be compelled twice to repeat the same thing.

   II. The law, therefore, both as it was first delivered to Adam and as
   it was given by Moses, agrees with the Gospel, (1.) In the general
   consideration of having one Author. For one and the same God is the
   author of both, who delivered the law as a legislator; (Gen. ii. 17;
   Exod. xx. 2;) but he promulgated the Gospel as the Father of mercies
   and the God of all grace: whence the former is frequently denominated
   "the law of God," and the latter "the Gospel of God." (Rom. i, 1.) (2.)
   In the general relation of their matter. For the doctrine of each
   consists of a command to obedience, and of the promise of a reward. On
   this account each of them has the name of hrwt "the law," which is also
   commonly ascribed to both in the Scriptures. (Isa. ii. 3.) (3.) In the
   general consideration of their end, which is the glory of the wisdom,
   goodness and justice of God. (4.) In their common subject, as not being
   distinguished by special respects. For the law was imposed on men, and
   to men also was the gospel manifested.

   III. There is, besides, a certain proper agreement of the law, as it
   was delivered to Adam, with the Gospel; from which agreement the law,
   as given through Moses, is excluded: it is placed in the possibility of
   its performance. For Adam was able, with the aid of God, to fulfill the
   law by those powers which he had received in creation: otherwise,
   transgression could not have been imputed to him for a crime. The
   gospel also is inscribed in the hearts of those who are in covenant
   with God, that they may be able to fulfill the condition which it
   prescribes.

   IV. But the difference between the law, as it was first delivered, and
   the gospel, consists principally in the following particulars. (1.) In
   the special respect of the Author. For, in the exercise of benevolence
   to his innocent creature, God delivered the law without regard to
   Christ, yet of strict justice requiring obedience, with the promise of
   a reward and the denunciation of a punishment. But in the exercise of
   grace and mercy, and having respect to Christ his anointed one, God
   revealed the Gospel; and, through justice attempered with mercy,
   promulgated his demands and his promises. (2.) In the particular
   relation of its matter. For the law says, "Do this, and thou shalt
   live." (Rom. x. 5.) But the Gospel says, "If thou wilt BELIEVE, thou
   shalt be saved." And this difference lies not only in the postulate,
   from which the former is called "the law of works," but the Gospel "the
   law of faith," (Rom. iii. 27,) but also in the promise: for though in
   each of them eternal life was promised, yet by the Gospel it was to be
   conferred as from death and ignominy, but by the law as from natural
   felicity. (2 Tim. i. 10.) Besides, in the Gospel is announced remission
   of sins, as preparatory to life eternal; of which no mention is made in
   the [Adamic] law; because neither was this remission necessary to one
   who was not a sinner, nor would its announcement have [then] been
   useful to him, although he might afterwards have become a sinner.

   V. (3.) They likewise differ in the mode of remuneration. For according
   to the [primeval] law, "To him that WORKED, the reward would be of
   debt;" (Rom. iv. 4;) and to him that transgressed, the punishment
   inflicted would be of the severity of strict justice. But to him that
   BELIEVETH, the reward is bestowed of grace; and to him that believeth
   not, condemnation is due according to justice tempered with clemency in
   Christ Jesus. (John iii. 16, 19; xi, 41.) They are discriminated in the
   special consideration of their subject. For the law was delivered to
   man while innocent, and already constituted in the favour of God. (Gen.
   ii. 17.) But the Gospel was bestowed upon man as a sinner, and one who
   was to be brought back into the favour of God, because it is "the word
   of reconciliation." (2 Cor. v. 19.) (5.) They differ in the peculiar
   respect of their end. For by the law are illustrated the wisdom,
   goodness, and strict justice of God: but by the Gospel is manifested a
   far more illustrious display of the wisdom of God, of his goodness
   united with gracious mercy, and of justice mildly attempered in Christ
   Jesus. (1 Cor. i. 20-24; Ephes. i. 8; Rom. iii. 24-26.)

   THE LAW OF MOSES

   VI. But the difference between the law, as it was given by Moses, and
   is styled "the Old Testament," and the gospel as it comes under the
   appellation of "the New Testament," lies according to the Scriptures in
   the following particulars. (1.) In the distinct property of God who
   instituted them. For He made the old covenant, as one who was angry at
   the sins which remained without expiation under the preceding [Adamic]
   covenant. (Heb. ix. 5, 15.) But He instituted the new, as being
   reconciled, or, at least as about to accomplish reconciliation by that
   covenant, in the Son of his love, and by the word of his grace. (2 Cor.
   v. 17-21; Ephes. ii. 16, 17.) (2.) In the mode of institution, which
   corresponds in each of them to the condition of the things to be
   instituted. For the law of Moses was delivered with the most obvious
   signs of the Divine displeasure and of God's dreadful judgment against
   sins and sinners. But the gospel was given with assured tokens of
   benevolence, good pleasure and love in Christ. Hence the Apostle says:
   "For ye are not come unto the mount which might be touched and that
   burned with fire, nor unto blackness and darkness, and tempest," &c.
   "But ye are come unto Mount Sion," &c. (Heb. xii. 18-24.) (3.) In the
   substance of the commands and promises. For the commands of the law
   were chiefly carnal, (Heb. vii. 16,) and contained "the handwriting of
   ordinances which was contrary to us:" (Col. ii. 14.) Most of the
   promises were likewise corporal, and stipulated engagements for an
   earthly inheritance, which suited "the old man." (Heb. x. 1.) But the
   gospel is spiritual, (John iv. 21, 23,) containing spiritual commands
   and the promise of a heavenly inheritance agreeing with "the new man;"
   (Heb. viii. 6; Ephes. i. 3,) though it promises earthly blessings, as
   additions, to those who "seek first the kingdom God and his
   righteousness." (Matt. vi. 33.)

   VII. (4.) We place the fourth difference in the Mediator or
   Intercessor. For Moses is the mediator of the Old Testament, Jesus
   Christ of the, New. (Gal. iii. 19; Heb. ix. 15.) The law was given by a
   servant, but the gospel was given by the Lord himself revealed. (Heb.
   iii. 5, 6.) "The law was given by Moses; Grace and truth came by Jesus
   Christ" (John 1, 17.) The law was given by the hands of a mediator,
   (Gal. iii. 19,) agreeably to what is mentioned in other passages; (Lev.
   xxvi. 46; Deut. v. 26-31;) and Christ is styled "the Mediator of the
   New Testament." (Heb. ix. 16.) (5.) They also differ in the blood
   employed for the confirmation of each Testament. The old covenant was
   ratified by the blood of animals; (Exod. xxiv. 5, 6; Heb. ix. 18-20;)
   but the new one was confirmed by the precious blood of the Son of God,
   (Heb. ix. 14,) which is likewise on this account called "the blood of
   the New Testament." (Matt. xxvi. 28.) (6.) They differ in the place of
   their promulgation. For the Old Covenant was promulgated from Mount
   Sinai; (Exod. xix. 18;) But the New one "went forth out of Zion and
   from Jerusalem." (Isa. ii. 3; Micah iv. 2.) This difference is likewise
   pointed out in the plainest manner by the Apostle Paul. (Gal. iv.
   24-31; Heb. xii. 18-21.)

   VIII. (7.) The seventh difference shall be taken from the subject, both
   those to whom each was given, and on whom each was inscribed. The old
   law was given to the "old man." The New Testament was instituted for
   "the new man." From this circumstance, St. Augustine supposes that
   these two Testaments have obtained the appellation of "the Old" and of
   "the New Testament." The old law was inscribed on "tables of stone"
   (Exod. xxx. 1, 18.) But the gospel is "written in fleshly tables" (Jer.
   xxxi. 33; 2 Cor. iii. 3.) (8.) The eighth difference is in their
   adjuncts: and this in two ways:

   (i.) The old law was "weak and beggarly," and incapable of giving life.
   (Gal. iv. 9; iii, 21.) But the gospel contains the unsearchable riches
   of Christ," (Ephes. iii. 8,) and "is the power of God unto salvation to
   every one that believeth." (Rom. i. 16.) (ii.) The old law was an
   insupportable burden, which "neither the Jews nor their fathers were
   able to bear." (Acts xv. 10.) But the gospel contains "the yoke" of
   Jesus Christ, which is "easy," and "his burden," which is "light"
   (Matt. xi. 29, 30.)

   IX. (9.) The ninth difference shall be taken from the versity of their
   effects. For the Old Testament is "the letter which killeth," "the
   administration of death and of condemnation." But the New Testament is
   "the Spirit that giveth life," "the ministration of the Spirit of
   righteousness, and of life" (2 Cor. iii. 6-11.) The Old Covenant
   resembled Agar, and "gendered to bondage;" the New like Sarah, begets
   unto liberty. (Gal. iv. 23, 24.) "The law entered, that the offense
   might abound," (Rom. v. 20,) and it "worketh wrath" (iv, 15.) But "the
   blood of the New Testament," exhibited in the gospel, (Matt. xxvi. 28,)
   expiates sin, (Heb. ix. 14, 15,) and "speaketh better things than that
   of Abel" (12, 24.)

   The Old Testament is the bond on which sins are written:

   (Col. ii. 14) but the gospel is the proclamation of liberty, and the
   doctrine of the cross, to which was nailed the bond, or "hand-writing
   against us," and was by this very act, "taken out of the way." (10.)
   The tenth difference shall be placed in the time, both of the
   promulgation of each, and of their duration. The Old Testament was
   promulgated when God brought the children of Israel out of Egypt. (Jer.
   xxxi. 32.) But the New, at a later age, and in these last times. (Heb.
   viii. 8, 9.) It was designed that the Old Testament should endure down
   to the advent of Christ, and afterwards be abolished. (Gal. iii. 19;
   Heb. vii. 18; 2 Cor. iii. 10.) But the New Testament continueth
   forever, being confirmed by the blood of the great High Priest, "who
   was made a priest after the power of an endless life" by the word of an
   oath, (Heb. vii. 16-20,) and "through the eternal Spirit, offered
   himself to God." (ix, 14.) From this last difference, it is probable,
   the appellations of "the Old Testament" and "the New," derived their
   origin.

   THE SAINTS UNDER THE OLD TESTAMENT

   X. But, lest any one should suppose that the Fathers who lived under
   the law and the Old Testament, were entirely destitute of grace, faith
   and eternal life; it is to be recollected that even at that period, the
   promise was in existence which had been made to Adam concerning "the
   Seed of the woman," (Gen. iii. 15,) which also concerned the seed of
   Abraham, to whom "the promises were made," (Gal. iii. 16,) and in whom
   "all the kindreds of the earth were to be blessed;" (Acts iii. 25;) and
   that these promises were received in faith by the holy fathers. As this
   promise is comprehended by divines under the name of "the Old
   Testament," taken in a wide acceptation, and is called by the apostle,
   diaqhkh "the covenant," (Gal. iii. 17,) as well as, in the plural, "the
   covenants of promise;" (Ephes. ii. 12;) let us also consider how far
   "this covenant of promise," and the New Testament, and the gospel so
   called, by way of excellence, as being the completion of the promises,
   (Gal. iii. 16, 17,) and as being the promise," (Heb. ix. 15,) agree
   with and differ from each other.

   XI. We place the Agreement in those things which concern the substance
   of each. For, (1.) With regard to the Efficient Cause, both of them
   were confirmed through the mere grace and mercy of God who had respect
   unto Christ. (2.) The matter of each was one and the same: that is,
   "the obedience of faith" was required in both, (Gen. xv. 6; Rom. 4;
   Heb. 11,) and the inheritance of eternal life was promised through the
   imputation of the righteousness of faith, and through gracious adoption
   in Christ. (Rom. ix. 4; Heb. xi. 8.) (3.) One object, that is Christ,
   who was promised to the fathers in the prophetical scriptures, and whom
   God has exhibited in the Gospel. (Acts iii. 19, 20; xiii, 32.) (4.) One
   end, the praise of the glorious Grace of God in Christ. (Rom. iv. 2,
   3.) (5.) Both these covenants were entered into with men invested in
   the same formal relation, that is, with men as sinners, and to those
   "who work not, but who believe on Him that justifies the ungodly."
   (Rom. ix. 8, xi, 30-33.) (6.) Both of them have the same Spirit
   witnessing, or sealing the truth of each in the minds of those who are
   parties to the covenant. (2 Cor. iv. 13.) For since "the adoption" and
   "the inheritance" pertain likewise to the fathers in the Old Testament,
   (Rom. ix. 4; Gal. iii. 18,) "the Spirit of adoption," who is "the
   earnest of the inheritance," cannot be denied to them. (Rom. viii. 15;
   Ephes. i. 14) (7.) They agree in their effects. For both the covenants
   beget children to liberty: "In Isaac shall thy seed be called." (Rom.
   ix. 7.) "So then, brethren, we are not the children of the bondwoman,
   but of the free; and are, as Isaac was, the children of promise." (Gal.
   iv. 31, 28.) Both of them administer the righteousness of faith, and
   the inheritance through it. (Rom. iv. 13.) Both excite spiritual joy in
   the hearts of believers. (John viii. 56; Luke ii. 10.) (8.) Lastly,
   they agree in this particular--that both of them were confirmed by the
   oath of God. Neither of them, therefore, was to be abolished, but the
   former was to be fulfilled by the latter. (Heb. vi. 13, 14, 17; vii,
   20, 21.)

   XII. But there is a Difference in some accidental circumstances which
   derogate nothing from their substantial unity. (1.) Respecting the
   accident of their object: For when the advent of Christ drew near, He
   was offered by promise. (Mal. iii. 1.) But He is now manifested in the
   Gospel. (1 John i. 1, 2; iv, 14) (2.) Hence also arises the second
   difference, respecting the accident of the faith required on their
   object. For as present and past things are more clearly known than
   future things, so the faith in Christ to come was more obscure, than
   the faith which beholds a present Christ. (Heb. xi. 13; Num. xiv. 17.)
   (3.) To these let the third difference be added--that Christ with his
   benefits was formerly proposed to the Israelites under types and
   shadows:

   (Heb. 12; Gal. iii. 16) But He is now offered in the Gospel "to be
   beheld with open face," and the reality of the things themselves and
   "the body" are exhibited. (2 Cor. iii. 18; John i. 17; Col. ii. 17;
   Gal. iii. 13, 25.) (4.) This diversity of administrations displays the
   fourth difference in the heir himself. For the apostle compares the
   children of Israel to the heir, who is "a child," and who required the
   superintendance of "tutors and governors:" but he compares believers
   under the New Testament to an adult heir. (Gal. iv. 1-5.) (5.) Hence is
   deduced a fifth difference-that the infant heir, as "differing nothing
   from a servant" was held in bondage under the economy of the ceremonial
   law; from which servitude are liberated those persons who have believed
   in Christ after the expiration of "the time of tutelage before
   appointed of the Father." (6.) To this condition the Spirit of the
   infant heir is also accommodated, and will afford us the sixth
   difference that the heir was in truth under the influence of "the
   Spirit of adoption," but, because he was then only an infant, this
   Spirit was intermixed with that of fear; but the adult heir is under
   the complete influence of "the Spirit of adoption," to the entire
   exclusion of that of fear. (Rom. viii. 15; Gal. iv. 6.) (7.) The
   seventh difference consists in the number of those who are called to
   the communion of each of these covenants. The promise was confined
   within the boundaries of "the commonwealth of Israel," from which the
   Gentiles were "aliens," being also "strangers from the covenants of
   promise." (Ephes. ii. 11-13, 17.) But the Gospel is announced to every
   creature that is under heaven, and the mound of separation is
   completely removed. (Matt. xxviii. 19; Mark xvi. 15; Col. i. 13.)

   XIII. But these three, the Law, the Promise, and the Gospel, may become
   subjects of consideration in another order, either as opposed among
   themselves, or as subordinate to each other. The condition of the law,
   therefore, as it was delivered to Adam, excludes the necessity of
   making the promise and announcing the Gospel; and, on the other hand,
   the necessity of making the promise and announcing the Gospel,
   declares, that man has not obeyed the law which was given to him. For
   justification cannot be at once both "of grace" and "of debt;" nor can
   it, at the same time, admit and exclude "boasting." (Gal. ii. 17; Rom.
   iv. 4, 5; iii, 27.) It was also proper that the promise should precede
   the Gospel, and should in return be fulfilled by the Gospel: for, as it
   was not befitting that such a great blessing should be bestowed unless
   it were ardently desired, so it was improper that the desire of the
   earnest expectants should be frustrated. (1 Pet. i. 10-12; Hag. ii. 7;
   Mal. iii. 1.) Nor was it less equitable, that, after the promise had
   been made, the law should be economically repeated, by which might be
   rendered apparent the necessity of the grace of the promise, (Gal. iii.
   19-24; Acts xiii. 38, 39,) and that, being convinced of this necessity,
   they might be compelled to flee to its shelter. (Gal. ii. 15, 16.) The
   use of the law was also serviceable to the Gospel which was to be
   received by faith. (Col. ii. 14, 17.) While the promise was in
   existence, it was also the will of God to add other precepts, and
   especially such as were ceremonial, by which sin might be ["sealed
   home,"] or testified against, and a previous intimation might be given
   of the completion of the promise. And when the promise was fulfilled,
   it was the will of God that these additional precepts should be
   abrogated, as having completed their functions. (Heb. x. 9, 10.)
   Lastly, the moral law ought to serve both to the promise and to the
   Gospel, which have now been received by faith, as a rule according to
   which believers ought to conform their lives. (Psalm cxix. 105; Tit.
   iii. 8.) But may God grant, that from his word we may be enabled still
   more clearly to understand this glorious economy of his, to his glory,
   and for gathering together in Christ!"
     __________________________________________________________________

  DISPUTATION 14

  ON THE OFFICES OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST

  RESPONDENT: PETER FAVERIUS

   I. Since all offices are instituted and imposed for the sake of a
   certain end, and on this account bear some resemblance to means for
   obtaining that end; the most convenient method of treating on the
   offices of Christ will be for us to enter into an examination of this
   subject according to the acceptation of the name by which He is
   denominated. For he is called Jesus Christ, in words which belong to a
   person according to the signification conveyed by them, as well as by
   way of excellence. In the first of those words is comprehended the
   relation of the end of his offices; and, in the second, that of the
   duties which conduce to such end.

   II. The word "Jesus" signifies the saviour, who is called Swthr by the
   Greeks. But "to save" is to render a man secure from evils, either by
   taking care that they do not assail him, or, if they have attacked him,
   by removing them, and of consequence by conferring the opposite
   blessings. But among the evils, two are of the very worst description:
   they are sin, and its wages, eternal death. Among the blessings also,
   two are of the greatest importance, righteousness and eternal life. He,
   therefore, is a saviour in an eminent degree who liberates men from sin
   and death eternal, the two greatest evils with which they are now
   surrounded and oppressed; and who confers upon them righteousness and
   life. On account of this method of saving, the name Jesus agrees well
   with this our saviour, according to the interpretation of it, which the
   angel gave in Matt. i. 21. For such a method of salvation was highly
   befitting the excellence of this exalted person, who is the proper,
   natural and only-begotten Son of God; especially when other salvations
   were capable of being accomplished by his servants, Moses, Joshua,
   Othniel, Gideon, Jephtha and David.

   III. The word "Christ," denotes an anointed person, who is called h y m
   "the Messiah," by the Hebrews. Under the Old Testament, oil was
   anciently used in anointing; because, according to its natural
   efficacy, it rendered bodies not only fragrant but agile, and was
   therefore well fitted for typifying two supernatural things. The First
   is, the sanctification and consecration of a person to undertake and
   discharge some divine office. The Second is, adoption, or the
   conferring of gifts necessary for that purpose. But each of these acts
   belongs properly and per se to the Holy Spirit, the author and donor of
   Holiness and of all endowments. (Isa. xi. 2.) Wherefore it was proper,
   that he who was eminently styled "the Messiah, should be anointed with
   the Holy Spirit, indeed "above all his fellows," (or those who were
   partakers of the same blessings,) (Psalm xlv. 7,) that is, that He
   might be made the Holy of holies, and might be endued not only with
   some gifts of the Holy Spirit, but with the whole of the Holy Spirit
   without measure. (John 3, xxxiv, ;1, 14.) But when he is called "the
   saviour" by anointing, it appears to us that he must for this reason be
   here considered as a Mediatorial saviour, who has been constituted by
   God the Father, and [as Mediator] is subordinate to Him. He is
   therefore the nearer to us, not only according to the nature of his
   humanity, of which we have already treated, but also according to the
   mode of saving, which reflection conduces greatly to confirm us in
   faith and hope against temptations.

   IV. Two distinct and subordinate acts appertain to the salvation which
   is signified by the name Jesus; and they are not only necessarily
   required for it, but also suffciently embrace its entire power. The
   First is, the asking and obtaining of redemption from sin and death
   eternal, and of righteousness and life. The Second is, the
   communication or distribution of the salvation thus obtained. According
   to the former of these acts, Christ is called "our saviour by merit;"
   according to the latter he is called "our saviour by efficacy."
   According to the first, he is constituted the Mediator "for men, in
   those things which pertain to God." (Heb. v. 1.) According to the
   second, he is appointed the Mediator or vicegerent of God, in those
   things which are to be transacted with men. From this it is apparent,
   that two offices are necessary for effecting salvation-the priestly and
   the regal; the former office being designed for the acquisition of
   salvation, and the latter for its communication: on which account this
   saviour is both a royal priest and a priestly king, our Melchisedec,
   that is, "king of Salem, which is king of peace and priest of the Most
   High God." (Heb. vii. 2.) His people also are a royal priesthood and a
   sacerdotal kingdom or nation. (1 Pet. ii. 5, 9.)

   V. But since it has seemed good to the wise and just God, to save none
   except believers; nor, in truth, is it right that any one should be
   made partaker of the salvation procured by the priesthood of Christ,
   and dispensed by His kingly office, except the man who acknowledges Him
   for his priest and king; and since the knowledge of Christ, and faith
   in him, are produced in the hearts of men by the power of the Holy
   Ghost, through the preaching of the word as the means appointed by God;
   for these reasons the prophetical office is likewise necessary for
   effecting salvation, and a perfect saviour must be a prophet, priest
   and king, that is, by every reason according to which this ample title
   can be deservedly attributed to any one. We nave Jesus therefore, that
   is, the saviour, by a most excellent and perfect notion called Christ,
   because he has been anointed by God as a prophet, priest and king.
   (Matt. xvii. 5; Psalm cx. 4; 2, 6; John xviii. 37.) On each of these
   four offices we shall treat in order, and shew, (1.) That all and each
   of these offices belong to our Christ. (2.) The quality of these
   offices. (3.) The functions pertaining to each of them. (4.) The events
   or consequences.

   VI. The Messiah was the future prophet promised to the fathers under
   the Old Testament. Moses said, "The Lord thy God will raise up unto you
   a prophet like unto me; unto him shall ye hearken." (Deut. xviii. 15.)
   Isaiah also says "I will give thee for a covenant of the people, for a
   light of the Gentiles, to open the blind eyes," &c. (xlii, 6.) "Jehovah
   hath called me from the womb, and he hath made my mouth like a sharp
   sword," &c. (xlix, 1, 2.) The attestation, by anointing, of his call to
   the prophetical office, was likewise predicted: "The Spirit of the Lord
   God is upon me; because the Lord hath anointed me to preach good
   tidings," &c. (xli, 1.) So was his being furnished with the necessary
   gifts when he was thus called and sealed: "The Spirit of the Lord shall
   rest upon Him, the Spirit of wisdom and understanding," &c. (xi, 2.)
   Lastly, Divine assistance was promised: "In the shadow of his hand hath
   He hid me, and made me a polished shaft; in his quiver hath he hid me."
   (xlix, 2.) And this thing was publicly know, not only to the Jews, but
   likewise to the Samaritans, as is apparent from what the woman of
   Samaria said, "When Messias is come, He will tell us all things." (John
   iv. 25.) But our Jesus himself testifies, that these predictions were
   fulfilled in him, and that he was the prophet sent into the world from
   God. After having read a passage out of Isaiah's prophecy, he spake
   thus, "This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears." (Luke iv.
   21.) "To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world,
   that I should bear witness unto the truth." (John xviii. 37.) God
   himself also bore his testimony from heaven, when he "opened the
   heavens unto Christ" immediately after he had been baptized by John,
   sent down upon Him the Holy Spirit, and in inaugural strains of the
   highest commendation seemed to consecrate him to this office. (Matt.
   iii. 16.)

   VII. In the Quality of the prophetic office, we take into our
   consideration the excellence not only of the vocation, instruction and
   divine assistance afforded, but likewise that of the doctrine proposed
   by Him, according to each of which it far exceeds the entire dignity of
   all the prophets. (Luke 4.) For God's approval of his mission was
   expressed by three peculiar signs. the opening of the heavens, the
   descent of the Holy Ghost in a bodily shape upon Him, and the voice of
   his Father conveyed to him. The instruction, or furnishing, by which He
   learned what things he ought to teach, was not "by dreams and visions,"
   nor by inward or outward discourse with an angel, neither was it by a
   communication of "mouth to mouth," which yet [in the case of Moses] was
   without the actual sight of the glory and the face of God; (Num. 12;)
   but it was by the clear vision of God and by an intimate intuition into
   the secrets of the Father: "For the only-begotten Son, who is in the
   bosom of the Father, hath declared him to us;" (John i. 18;) "He that
   cometh from heaven testified what he hath seen and heard." (iii, 32.)
   The aid of the Holy Spirit to Him, was so ready and every moment
   intimately near, that He, like one who was lord by possession and use,
   employed the Holy Spirit at pleasure, and as frequently as it seemed
   good to himself. But the excellence of the doctrine lies in this, that
   it did not announce the law, neither as being the power of God unto
   salvation "to him who worked and that of debt," (Rom. iv. 4,) nor as
   being the seal of sin and of condemnation; (Col. ii. 14;) neither did
   it announce the promise, by which righteousness and salvation were
   promised OF GRACE to him that believed; (Gal. iii. 17-19;) but it
   announced the Gospel, according to this expression, "He hath sent me to
   preach good tidings to the meek," (Isa. lxi. 1,) or, "the gospel to the
   poor;" (Matt. xi. 5;) because it exhibited GRACE and TRUTH, as it
   contained "the end of the law," and the accomplishment of the promise.
   (Rom. x. 4; i, 1, 2.)

   VIII. The Functions which appertain to the prophetic office of Christ,
   are, the proposing of his doctrine, its confirmation and prayers for
   its felicitous success; all of which were executed by Christ in a
   manner which evinced the utmost power and fidelity. (1.) He proposed
   his doctrine, with the greatest wisdom, which his adversaries could not
   resist; with the most ardent zeal for the glory of God his Father, and
   for the salvation of men; without respect of persons; and with an
   authority which was never exercised by other teachers, not even by the
   prophets. (2.) His confirmation was added to the doctrine, not only by
   the Scriptures of the Old Testament, but likewise by signs of every
   kind by which it is possible to establish the divinity of any doctrine.
   (i.) By the declaration of the knowledge which is peculiar to God, such
   as the inspection of the heart, the revelation of the secrets of
   others, and the prediction of future events. (ii.) By a power which
   belongs to God alone, and which was demonstrated "in signs and wonders,
   and mighty deeds." (iii.) By the deepest patience, by which He
   willingly suffered the death of the cross for the truth of God, that he
   might confirm the promises made to the fathers, "having witnessed
   before Pontius Pilate a good confession." (3.) Lastly. He employed very
   frequent and earnest prayers, with the most devout thanksgiving; on
   which account he often retired into solitary places, which he spent
   whole nights in prayer.

   IX. The Issue or consequence of the prophetic office of Christ, so far
   as he executed it in his own person while he remained on earth, was not
   only the instruction of a few persons, but likewise the rejection [of
   Himself and his doctrine] by great numbers, and even by their rulers.
   The former of these consequences occurred according to the nature and
   merit of the doctrine itself. The latter, accidentally and by the
   malice of men. Christ himself mentions both of these issues in Isaiah's
   prophecy, when he says, not without complaining, "Behold, I and the
   children whom the Lord hath given me, are for signs and for wonders in
   Israel from the Lord of hosts." (viii, 18.) "I have laboured in vain, I
   have spent my strength for naught and in vain." (xlix, 4.) But because
   this repulse of Christ's doctrine could not occur without proving a
   stumbling block to the weak, it was the good pleasure of God to obviate
   it in a manner at once the wisest and the most powerful, (i.) By a
   prophecy which foretold that this rejection would actually take place:
   "The stone which the builders refused, is becoming the head-stone of
   the corner:" (Psalm cxviii. 22.) (ii.) And by the fulfillment of that
   prediction, which was completed by the resurrection of Christ from the
   dead, and by his being placed at the right hand of God; by which Christ
   became the head and foundation of the angle, or corner, uniting the two
   walls, that of the Jews and that of the Gentiles, in accordance with
   these words of the prophet Isaiah, "It is a light thing that thou
   shouldest be my servant, to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to
   restore the preserved of Israel: I have also given thee for a light to
   the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my salvation unto the end of the
   earth." (xlix, 6.) These words contain an intimation of the fruit of
   Christ's prophesying as administered by his ambassadors.

   X. Topics, similar to the preceding, come under our consideration in
   the Priestly Office of Christ. (1.) The Messiah, promised of old, was
   to be a Priest, and Jesus of Nazareth was a Priest. This is proved (i.)
   by express passages from the Scriptures of the Old Testament; and which
   attribute to the Messiah the Name of "Priest," and the Thing signified
   by the name. With regard to the Name: "Thou an a Priest for ever after
   the order of Melchizedec." (Psalm cx. 4.) With regard to the Thing
   signified, "Surely He hath borne our griefs: He was wounded for our
   transgressions: And the Lord hath laid on Him the iniquity of us all.
   When thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin, He shall see his
   seed, &c. He bore the sins of many, and made intercession for the
   transgressor" (Isa. liii. 4-6, 10-12; Rom. iv. 15.) (2.) By arguments
   taken from a comparison of the dignity of his person and priesthood.
   For the Messiah is the first-begotten Son of God, the principal dignity
   of the priesthood, and governor over the house of his Father. (Psalm
   ii. 7; lxxxix, 27; Gen. xlix. 3.) Therefore, to Him appertains the
   excellence of administering the priesthood in the house of God, which
   is Heaven. (Heb. iii. 6; x, 21.) For that is properly typified by a
   temple, the place of the priesthood; and principally by the innermost
   part of it, which is called "the holy of holies." (ix, 24.) Also, by
   arguments deduced from the nature of the people over whom He is placed.
   This people is "a kingdom of priests" (Exod. xix. 6,) and "a royal
   priesthood" (1 Pet. ii. 9.) But the Christian Faith holds it, an
   indisputable axiom, that "Jesus of Nazareth is a priest," by the most
   explicit Scriptures of the New Testament, in which the title and all
   things pertaining to the sacerdotal office are attributed to him. (Heb.
   ii. 5.) For the Father conferred that honour upon Him, sanctified and
   consecrated Him; (ii, 10;) and "He was made perfect through
   sufferings," "that He might be a merciful and faithful High Priest, and
   be able to sympathize with, or to succour them that are tempted." (ii,
   18.) The Father also "opened his ears," (Psalm xl. 6,) or "prepared a
   body for Him," (Heb. x. 5,) "that He might have somewhat also to
   offer," (viii, 3,) and hath placed Him, after his resurrection from the
   dead, at his own right hand in heaven, that He may there perpetually
   "make intercession for us." (Rom. viii. 34.)

   XI. But the Scriptures of the Old Testament speak of the Nature and
   Quality peculiar to Messiah the Priest, and assert that his priesthood
   is not according to the order of Levi. (Psalm cx. 4; Heb. v. 5, 6.) For
   David speaks thus, in the person of the Messiah, "Sacrifice and
   offering thou didst not desire. Mine ears thou hast opened.
   Burnt-offering and sin-offering hast thou not required. Then said I,
   Lo, I come. In the volume of the book it is written of me, to do thy
   will, O my God! Yea, I have willed; and thy law is within my heart."
   (Psalm xl. 6-8.) That is, "Thou hadst no pleasure in the sacrifices
   which are offered by the law" according to the Levitical ritual. (Heb.
   x. 6-9.) They also assert, that "He is a Priest for ever after the
   order of Melchizedec." (Psalm cx. 4.) But the entire nature of that
   priesthood is more distinctly explained in the New Testament,
   especially in the Epistle to the Hebrews, the excellence and
   superiority of the Messiah's priesthood above the Levitical having been
   previously established. (Heb. x. 5.) This pre-eminence is shewn by the
   contrast between them. (1.) The Levitical priesthood was typical and
   shadowy; but that of the Messiah is real and true, and contains the
   very body and express pattern of the things. (2.) In the Levitical
   priesthood, the Priest and the victim differed in the subject. For the
   Priest after the order of Levi offered the sacrifices of other men. But
   the Messiah is both the Priest and the victim. For "He offered
   himself," (Heb. ix. 14,) and "by his own blood has entered into
   heaven," (ix, 12,) and all this as it is an expiatory priesthood. But
   as it is eucharistical, (for it embraces the entire amplitude of the
   priesthood,) the Messiah offers sacrifices which are distinguished by
   him according to the person; yet they are such as, being born again of
   his Spirit from above, are flesh of his flesh and bone of his bones.
   (x, 14; ix, 26; Ephes. v. 30; 1 Pet. ii. 5.) (3.) They differ in the
   mode of their institution and confirmation. The Levitical priesthood
   was "instituted after the law of a carnal commandment;" but that of the
   Messiah, after the law of a spiritual commandment, and "the power of an
   endless life." (Heb. vii. 16.) The Levitical was instituted "without an
   oath;" but Christ's "with an oath," by which it was corroborated beyond
   the other. (vii, 20, 21, 28.) (4.) The fourth difference is in the time
   of their institution. The Levitical priesthood was instituted first;
   that of Christ, afterwards. The first, in the times of the Old
   Testament: the other, in those of the New. The former, when the church
   was in its infancy; the latter, when it had arrived at maturity. The
   former, in the time of slavery; the latter, in that of liberty.

   XII. (5.) The fifth distinction lies in the persons discharging the
   functions of the priesthood. In the former, the Priests were of the
   tribe of Levi, "men who had infirmities," who were mortal and sinful,
   and who, therefore, accounted it "needful to offer up sacrifice for
   their own sins and for the people's." (Heb. vii. 28; v, 3.) But the
   Messiah was of the tribe of Judah, (vii, 14,) weak indeed "in the days
   of his flesh," (5, 7,) but now when raised immortal from the dead and
   endued with "the power of an endless life," He is "holy, harmless,
   undefiled, and separate from sinners, and therefore needeth not to
   offer up sacrifice for himself." (7, 26, 27) (6.) We may denote a sixth
   difference in the end of the institution. The Levitical priesthood was
   instituted to ratify the old covenant; but that of the Messiah, for
   confirming the New. He is on this account called both "the Mediator of
   the New Testament," (ix, 15,) and "the surety of a better covenant,
   which was established upon better promises." (viii, 6.) (7.) They
   differ in their efficacy. For the Levitical is useless and
   inefficacious, "not being able to take away sins, (x, 11,) (for they
   remained under the old covenant,) nor could it sanctify or perfect the
   worshippers in their consciences, for "it sanctifieth only to the
   purifying of the flesh." (ix, 9, 10, 13.) But the priesthood of the
   Messiah is efficacious. For He hath destroyed sin and obtained eternal
   redemption, (ix, 12, 14.) He consecrates priests and sanctifies the
   worshipers in their consciences, and "saves them to the uttermost that
   come to God by Him." (vii, 25.) (8.) With the Apostle we place the
   eighth difference in the duration of each. It was necessary that the
   Levitical priesthood should be abrogated, and it was accordingly
   abrogated; (viii, 13;) but that of the Messiah endures for ever. For
   this difference between them we have as many reasons as for the
   differences which we have already enumerated.

   XIII. (9.) The ninth quality by which the Messiah's priesthood is
   distinguished from the Levitical, is this, "Now once in the end of the
   world, the Messiah hath appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of
   himself; (Heb. vii. 26;) and thus "by one offering hath He perfected
   for ever them that are sanctified." (x, 14.) But the Priests after the
   order of Levi "offered oftentimes the same sacrifices, "through each
   succeeding day, and month, and year. (x, 11; ix, 25.) (10.) The tenth
   property of the Messiah's priesthood is that of its nature. It does not
   pass from one person to another. For the Messiah has neither a
   predecessor nor a successor. (vii, 24, 25, 3.) But the Levitical
   priesthood was transmitted down from father to son. (11.) To this we
   add the eleventh difference, the Messiah was the only person of his
   order. For Melchizadeck was a type of Him, "like unto Him," but by no
   means equal with Him. (vii, 3.) But the Levitical Priests "truly were
   many, because they were not suffered to continue by reason of death;"
   (vii, 23;) and among them, some were of superior, some of inferior, and
   others of equal dignity. (12.) We deduce the twelfth and last
   distinction from the place in which each of them was administered. For
   the Levitical priesthood was administered on earth, and in fact in a
   certain spot peculiarly assigned to it; but though that of the Messiah
   commenced on earth, yet it consummated in heaven. (ix, 24.)

   XIV. The Actions which appertain to the priestly office of Christ, are
   those of oblation and intercession, according to the following
   passages: "Every high priest taken from among men is ordained for men
   in things pertaining to God, that he may offer both gifts and
   sacrifices for sins: (Heb. v. 1.) And "He ever liveth to make
   intercession for them." (1.) Of the Messiah's Oblation two acts are
   described to us: the first of which is performed on earth; the
   delivering of his own body unto death, and the shedding of his blood.
   By this act He was consecrated or perfected, and opened heaven to
   himself: (ix, 12; x, 29, 10; ix, 24 -- xxvi, ) For it was a part of his
   office to enter into heaven by his own blood, and "through the veil,
   which is his flesh," (x, 22,) flesh indeed, destitute of blood, that
   is, destitute of life, and delivered up to death "for the life of the
   world," (John vi. 51,) although it was afterwards raised up again from
   death to life. The second act is, the presenting of himself, thus
   sprinkled with his own blood, before the face of his Father in heaven;
   and the offering of the same blood. To which we must add, the
   sprinkling of this blood on the consciences of believers, that they,
   "being purged from dead works, might serve the living God." (ix, 14.)
   (2.) Intercession is the second act of the priesthood of Christ, which
   also contains the prayer of Christ for us, and his advocacy or defense
   of us against the accusation with which we are charged by the grand
   adversary. (vii, 25; Rom. viii. 34; 1 John ii. 1, 2.) Because the force
   of this intercession is partly placed in the blood by which, not only
   Christ himself, but also our consciences, are sprinkled; the blood of
   Christ is said "to speak better things than that of Abel," (Heb. xii.
   24,) which cried unto God for vengeance against the fratricide.

   XV. The fourth part of the priesthood of Christ lies in the Results or
   Consequences. That the sacerdotal office concurs to the general effect
   of salvation, is apparent from this--that He is called Christ by
   consecration, which was effected "through sufferings," through which He
   is said "to have been made perfect," (Heb. ii. 10,) and thus to have
   "become the author of eternal salvation," (v, 9, 10,) being denominated
   "an High Priest forever after the order of Melchisedec." "But Christ,
   because he continueth ever, hath an unchangeable priesthood: wherefore
   he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by
   Him." (vii, 24, 25.) But the particular results which flow from the
   sacerdotal functions, when considered according to the two-fold act of
   oblation and intercession, are chiefly these: From Oblation, accrue the
   reconciling of us unto God the Father, (2 Cor. v. 19,) the obtaining of
   the remission of sins, (Rom. iii. 24-25,) of eternal redemption, (Heb.
   ix. 12,) and of the Spirit of grace, (Zech. xii. 10,) the laying open
   of the vein for the expiation of sin, and the disclosing of the
   fountain for sprinkling, (Zech. xiii. 1,) the removal of the curse,
   (Gal. iii. 13,) and the acquisition of everlasting righteousness and of
   life eternal, (Dan. ix. 24,) as well as a supreme power over all things
   in heaven and earth, (Phil. ii. 6-10,) for his church, to whom all
   these blessings are communicated: (Acts xx. 28) And, to sum up all in
   one expression, the procuring of the entire right to eternal life, and
   to all things whatsoever that are necessary either for its being given,
   or for its reception. Intercession obtains, that we, being reconciled
   to God, are saved from future wrath. (Rom. v. 9.) Christ as our
   intercessor offers to God, perfumed with the fragrant odour of his own
   sacrifice, the prayers and thanksgivings, and thus the whole rational
   worship which justified persons perform to God; (1 Pet. i. 5;) and he
   receives and turns aside the darts of accusation which Satan hurls
   against believers. (Rom. viii. 34.) All these blessings really flow
   from the sacerdotal functions of Christ; because he hath offered to God
   the true price of redemption for us, by which He has satisfied Divine
   justice, and interposed himself between us and the Father, who was
   justly angry on account of our sins; and has rendered Him placable to
   us. (1 Tim. ii. 6; Matt. xx. 28.) But the results per accidens is a
   greater pollution and the demerits of "a much sorer punishment" from
   having "trodden under foot the Son of God, and counted the blood of the
   covenant an unholy thing." (Heb. x. 29.)

   XVI. Nor is it at all repugnant to the merits and satisfaction of
   Christ, which belong to him as a priest and a victim, that God is
   himself said to have "loved the world and given his only begotten Son,"
   (John iii. 16,) to have delivered him unto death, (Rom. iv. 25,) to
   have reconciled the world unto himself in Christ, (2 Cor. v. 19,) to
   have redeemed us, (Luke i. 68,) and to have freely forgiven us our
   sins. (Rom. iii. 25.) For we must consider the affection of love to be
   two-fold in God. The first is a love for the creature--The other, a
   love for justice, united to which is a hatred against sin. It was the
   will of God that each of these kinds of love should be satisfied. He
   gave satisfaction to his love for the creature who was a sinner, when
   he gave up his Son who might act the part of Mediator. But he rendered
   satisfaction to his love for justice and to his hatred against sin,
   when he imposed on his Son the office of Mediator by the shedding of
   his blood and by the suffering of death; (Heb. ii. 10; v, 8, 9;) and he
   was unwilling to admit him as the Intercessor for sinners except when
   sprinkled with his own blood, in which he might be made the
   propitiation for sins. (ix, 12.) Again, he satisfies his love for the
   creature when he pardons sins, and that freely, because he pardons them
   through his love for the Creature; although by inflicting stripes upon
   his Son, in which he was "our peace," he had already rendered
   satisfaction to his love for justice. For it was not the effect of
   those stripes that God might love his creature, but that, while love
   for justice presented no hindrance, through his love for the creature
   he could remit sins and bestow life eternal. In this respect also it
   may with propriety be said that God rendered satisfaction to himself,
   and appeased himself in the Son of his love."

   XVII. It remains for us to discuss the Kingly Office of Christ. We must
   first consider, that the Messiah, according to the promise, was to be a
   King, and that Jesus of Nazareth is a King: "I will raise unto David a
   righteous branch, and a King shall reign and prosper." (Jer. xxiii. 5.)
   "David my servant, shall be king over them." (Ezek. xxxvii. 24.) But he
   was constituted king by unction: "Yet have I anointed my King upon my
   holy hill of Zion." (Psalm ii. 6.) On this account, the title of "the
   Messiah" belongs to him for a certain peculiar reason. Nor should He be
   merely a King, but the most eminent and famous among kings: "Thy God
   hath anointed thee with the oil of joy above thy fellows." (Psalm xlv.
   7.) "I will make him my First-born, higher than the kings of the
   earth." (lxxxix, 27.) Nay, he is the Lord and Master of all kings:
   therefore, O ye kings and judges of the earth, kiss the Son." (ii, 12.)
   "All kings shall fall down before Him." (lxxii, 11.) He was also to be
   instructed in all things necessary for the administration of his
   kingdom: "Give the King thy judgments, O God!" (lxxii, 1.) "The Lord
   shall send the rod of thy strength out of Zion." (cx, 2.) "Thou shalt
   break them with a rod of iron" (ii, 9.) "The Spirit of Jehovah shall
   rest upon him." (Isa. xi. 2.) God will likewise perpetually stand near
   Him: "With him shall my hand be established, mine arm also shall
   strengthen him." (Psalm lxxxix. 21.) But God hath made Jesus of
   Nazareth Lord and Christ, (Matt. ii. 2, 6,) "King of kings, and Lord of
   lords," (Rev. xvii. 14,) "all power being given unto Him in heaven and
   in earth," (Matt. xxviii. 19; Acts ii. 33,) and "authority over all
   flesh," (John xvii. 2,) that "unto Him every knee may bow." God also
   furnished or supplied Him with his Word and Spirit, as necessary means
   for the administration of his kingdom. He hath made angels also his
   servants to execute his commands. (Heb. i. 6, 14.) He stands constantly
   nigh to Him, "being placed at his right hand till he has made his
   enemies his footstool." (1 Cor. xv, ,5; Psalm cx. 1.)

   XVIII. We say, in one expression, concerning the Quality of the
   Messiah's kingdom, that it is a spiritual kingdom, not of this world,
   but of that which is to come, not earthly, but heavenly. For it was
   predicted, that such would be the kingdom of the Messiah; and such
   also, we assert, is the kingdom of Jesus of Nazareth. We prove the
   First, (1.) Because David and Solomon, and the reign of each, were
   types of the Messiah and his kingdom; for the Messiah is called David;
   (Ezek. xxxvii. 25;) and all the things spoken about Solomon which are
   high and excellent, belong with far more justness to the Messiah, and
   some of them to him alone. (2 Sam. vii. 12-16.) But earthly and carnal
   things are types of spiritual and heavenly things, not being
   homogeneous with them. (Psalm 1, 2.) (2.) It was predicted of the
   Messiah, that he should die and rise again, (Psalm xvi. 10,) that "he
   should see his seed," (Isa. liii. 10,) and that he should rise again
   into a spiritual life. (Psalm cx. 3.) Therefore, that he should be a
   spiritual King, and that his kingdom also should be spiritual. (Psalm
   lxxxix. 5-8; xcvi, 6-9.) (3.) It was predicted that the priesthood of
   the Messiah should be spiritual, a real priesthood, and not a typical
   one. Therefore, his kingdom also is of the same description; for there
   is a mutual analogy between them, according to that expression -" Ye
   shall be unto me a kingdom of priests," &c. (Exod. xix. 6.) (4.)
   Because the law of Moses was to be abrogated on account of its being
   carnal. But the administration of the priesthood and of the kingdom of
   Israel was conducted according to that law. Therefore the kingdom of
   the Messiah ought to be administered according to another law, which
   was more excellent, and therefore spiritual. (Jer. xxxi. 31-34.) But
   such as was the law, such were the King and his kingdom. (5.) Because
   the gentiles were to be called to a participation of the kingdom of the
   Messiah, and all of them were to be added to it with their kings, who
   should still continue as kings, and yet voluntarily serve the Messiah,
   (Psalm ii. 10, 11; cx, 3,) who should glory in him, and in him place
   all their blessedness. Nothing of this kind can be done, unless the
   kingdom of the Messiah be spiritual. (6.) Because the Jews were to be
   rejected by the Messiah, for their rebellion, who was unwilling to have
   them for his people, not to the prejudice of the Messiah himself, but
   to the injury of the Jews alone. (Mal. i. 10, 11; Isa. lxv, 2, 3.) This
   is a strong indication of a King and of a kingdom that are spiritual.
   (7.) The same conclusion may be drawn from the excellence, amplitude,
   duration, and mode of administration, of the Messiah's kingdom. But the
   kingdom of Jesus of Nazareth is spiritual and heavenly. For he said,
   "Repent, because the kingdom of heaven is at hand." (Matt. iv. 17.) "My
   kingdom is not of this world." (John xviii. 36.) This may also be shown
   in all those things which relate to that kingdom. For the King is no
   more known after the flesh, because he is become spiritual by his
   resurrection, and is "the Lord from heaven." (Rom. viii. 1 Corinthians
   15.) His Subjects are those who are already born again, in their souls,
   of his Spirit, and who shall likewise hereafter be spiritual in their
   bodies, and conformed unto him. The Law of the kingdom is spiritual:
   for it is the gospel of God, and the prescription of a rational and
   spiritual worship. (Rom. xii. 8; John iv. 23, 24.) Its Blessings are
   likewise spiritual--remission of sins, the Spirit of grace and life
   eternal. The Mode of Administration, and all its Means, are spiritual;
   for though all temporal things are subjected to Christ, yet he
   administers them in such a way as he knows will be conducive to the
   life that is spiritual and supernatural.

   XIX. The Acts which belong to the regal office of Christ are generally
   comprehended in vocation and judgment. If we be desirous to consider
   these two acts more distinctly, we may divide them into the four parts
   following: vocation, legislation, the communication of blessings and
   the removal of evils, and the final and universal judgment. (1.)
   Vocation is the first function by which Christ, the King, calls men out
   of a state of animal life and of sin, to the participation of the
   covenant of grace which he has confirmed by his own blood. For he did
   not find subjects in the nature of things; (Isa. lxiii. 10;) but as it
   was his office by the priesthood to acquire them for himself, so
   likewise as King, it is his province to call them to him by his word,
   and to draw them by his Spirit. (Psalm cx. 1-3; Ephes. iii. 17.) This
   vocation has two parts--a command to repent and believe, (Mark i. 14,
   15,) and a promise, (Matt. xxviii. 19, 20,) to which is also subjoined
   a threatening. (Tit. iii. 8;

   Mark xvi. 16.) (2.) Legislation, which we consider in a distinct form,
   is the second function of the regal office of Christ, by which he fully
   prescribes, to those who have been previously called and drawn to a
   participation of the covenant of grace, a rule by which they may live
   godly, righteously and soberly, and to which are also annexed promises
   and threatenings. To this must be added the act of the Holy Spirit by
   which believers are rendered fit to perform their duty. (3.) The third
   act is the communication of blessings, whether they be necessary or
   conducible to this animal life or to that which is spiritual, and the
   removal of the opposite evils, not through strict justice, but
   according to a certain dispensation, which is suited to the period of
   the present life. It is according to this that God equally "sendeth
   rain on the just and on the unjust," (Matt. v. 45,) and his "judgment
   often begins at his own house." (1 Pet. iv. 17.) (4.) The fourth and
   last act is the final and universal judgment, by which Christ, having
   been appointed by God to be the judge of all men, will pronounce a
   sentence of justification on his elect, and will bestow on them
   everlasting life; but after the sentence of condemnation has been
   uttered against the reprobates, they will be tormented with everlasting
   punishments. (Matt. 25.)

   XX. To these functions it is easy to subjoin their Results or
   Consequences, which exist from the functions themselves, according to
   their nature; and, at the same time, the Events which flow from the
   malice of men who reject Christ as their King. Among the former are
   repentance, faith, and thus the church herself, and her association
   with Christ her head, obedience performed to Christ's commands, the
   participation of blessings which are bestowed on men in the course of
   the present life, immunity from evils, and lastly, life eternal. Among
   the latter, are blinding, hardening, the giving over to a reprobate
   mind, the delivering unto the power of Satan, the imputation of sin,
   the gnawings of conscience in this life, and the feeling endurance of
   many evils, and, lastly, eternal death itself. All these evils Christ
   inflicts as an omniscient, omnipotent, and inflexible judge, who loves
   goodness and hates sin, from whose eyes we cannot hide ourselves, whose
   power we cannot avoid, and whose strictness and rigor we are unable to
   bend. May God grant, through his Son, Jesus Christ, in the power and
   efficacy of the Holy Spirit, that these considerations may serve to
   beget within us a filial and serious fear of God and Christ our Judge.

   AMEN! &lt;/div2&gt;
     __________________________________________________________________

  DISPUTATION 15

  ON DIVINE PREDESTINATION

  RESPONDENT: WILLIAM BASTINGIUS

   I. We call this decree "Predestination," in Greek, Proorismon from the
   verb Proorizein which signifies determine, appoint, or decree any thing
   before you enter on its execution. According to this general notion,
   predestination, when attributed to God, will be his decree for the
   governance of all things, to which divines usually give the appellation
   of PROVIDENCE. (Acts ii. 28; xvii, 26.) It is customary to consider in
   a less general notion, so far as it has reference to rational creatures
   who are to be saved or damned, for instance, angels and men. It is
   taken in a stricter sense about the predestination of men, and then it
   is usually employed in two ways; for it is sometimes accommodated to
   both the elect and the reprobate. At other times, it is restricted to
   the elect alone, and then it has reprobation as its opposite. According
   to this last signification, in which it is almost constantly used in
   Scripture, (Rom. viii. 29,) we will treat on predestination.

   II. Predestination, therefore, as it regards the thing itself, is the
   decree of the good pleasure of God in Christ, by which he resolved
   within himself from all eternity, to justify, adopt and endow with
   everlasting life, to the praise of his own glorious grace, believers on
   whom he had decreed to bestow faith. (Ephes. 1; Rom. 9.)

   III. The genus of predestination we lay down as a decree which is
   called in Scripture Proqesiv "the purpose of God," (Rom. ix. 11,) and
   Boulhn tou qelhmatov Qeou "the counsel of God's own will." (Ephes. i.
   11.) And this decree is not legal, according to what is said, "The man
   who doeth those things shall live by them;" (Rom. x. 5;) but it is
   evangelical, and this is the language which it holds: "This is the will
   of God, that every one who seeth the Son, and believeth on him, may
   have everlasting life." (John vi. 40; Rom. x. 9.) This decree,
   therefore, is peremptory and irrevocable; because the final
   manifestation of "the whole counsel of God" concerning our salvation,
   is contained in the gospel. (Acts xx. 27; Heb. i. 2; ii, 2, 3.)

   IV. The Cause of this decree is God, "according to the good pleasure"
   or the benevolent affection "of his own will." (Ephes. i. 5.) And God
   indeed is the cause, as possessing the right of determining as he wills
   both about men as his creatures, and especially as sinners, and about
   his blessings, (Jer. xviii. 6; Matt. xx. 14, 15,) "according to the
   good pleasure of his own will," by which, being moved with and in
   himself, he made that decree. This "good pleasure" not only excludes
   every cause which it could take from man, or which it could be imagined
   to take from him; but it likewise removes whatever was in or from man,
   that could justly move God not to make that gracious decree. (Rom. xi.
   34, 35.)

   V. As the foundation of this decree, we place Jesus Christ, the
   mediator between God and men, (Ephes. i. 4.) "in whom the Father is
   well pleased;" (Matt. iii. 17; Luke iii. 22;) "in whom God reconciled
   the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them" and
   "whom God made to be sin for us, that we might be made the
   righteousness of God in him." (2 Cor. v. 19, 21.) Through Him
   "everlasting righteousness was to be brought in," (Dan. ix. 24,)
   adoption to be acquired, the spirit of grace and of faith was to be
   obtained, (Gal. iv. 5, 19, 6,) eternal life procured, (John vi. 51,)
   and all the plenitude of spiritual blessings prepared, the
   communication of which must be decreed by predestination. He is also
   constituted by God the Head of all those persons who will, by divine
   predestination, accept of the equal enjoyment of these blessings.
   (Ephes. i. 22; v, 23; Heb. v. 9.)

   VI. We attribute Eternity to this decree; because God does nothing in
   time, which He has not decreed to do from all eternity. For "known unto
   God are all his works from the beginning of the world:" (Acts xv. 18)
   and "He hath chosen us in Christ before the foundation of the world."
   (Ephes. i. 4.) If it were otherwise, God might be charged with
   mutability.

   VII. We say that the object or matter of predestination is
   two-fold--Divine things, and Persons to whom the communication of those
   Divine things has been predestinated by this decree. (1.) These Divine
   Things receive from the Apostle the general appellation of "spiritual
   blessings:" (Ephes. i. 3.) Such are, in the present life,
   justification, adoption as sons, (Rom. viii. 29, 30,) and the spirit of
   grace and adoption. (Ephes. i. 5; John i. 12; Gal. iv. 6, 7.) Lastly,
   after this life, eternal life. (John iii. 15, 16.) The whole of these
   things are usually comprised and enunciated, in the Divinity schools,
   by the names of Grace and Glory. (2.) We circumscribe the Persons
   within the limits of the word "believers," which presupposes sin: for
   no one believes on Christ except a sinner, and the man who acknowledges
   himself to be that sinner. (Matt. ix. 13; xi, 28.) Therefore, the
   plenitude of those blessings, and the preparation of them which has
   been made in Christ, were necessary for none but sinners. But we give
   the name of "believers," not to those who would be such by their own
   merits or strength, but to those who by the gratuitous and peculiar
   kindness of God would believe in Christ. (Rom. ix. 32; Gal. ii. 20;
   Matt. xi. 25; xiii, 11; John vi. 44; Phil. i. 29.)

   VIII. The form is the decreed communication itself of these blessings
   to believers, and in the mind of God the pre-existent and pre-ordained
   relation and ordination of believers to Christ their Head: the fruit of
   which they receive through a real and actual union with Christ their
   Head. In the present life, this fruit is gracious, through the
   commencement and increase of the union; and in the life to come, it is
   glorious, through the complete consummation of this union. (2 Tim. i.
   9, 10; John i. 16, 17; xvii, 11, 12, 22-24; Ephes. iv. 13, 15.)

   IX. The end of predestination is the praise of the glorious grace of
   God: for since grace, or the gratuitous love of God in Christ, is the
   cause of predestination, it is equitable that to the same grace the
   entire glory of this act should be ceded. (Ephes. i. 6; Rom. xi. 36.)

   X. But this decree of predestination is "according to election," as the
   Apostle says: (Rom. ix. 6, xi, ) This election necessarily infers
   reprobation. Reprobation therefore is opposed to predestination, as its
   contrary; and is likewise called "a casting away," (Rom. ix. 1,) "an
   ordination to condemnation," (Jude 4,) and "an appointment unto wrath."
   (1 Thess. v. 9.)

   XI. From the law of contraries, we define reprobation to be a decree of
   the wrath, or of the severe will, of God; by which he resolved from all
   eternity to condemn to eternal death unbelievers, who, by their own
   fault and the just judgment of God, would not believe, for the
   declaration of his wrath and power. (John iii. 18; Luke vii. 30; John
   xii. 37 40; 2 Thess. ii. 10, 11; Rom. ix. 22.)

   XII. Though by faith in Jesus Christ the remission of all sins is
   obtained, and sins are not imputed to them who believe; (Rom. iv.
   2-11;) yet the reprobate will be compelled to endure the punishment,
   not only of their unbelief, (by the contrary of which they might avoid
   the chastisement due to the rest of their sins,) but likewise of the
   sins which they have committed against the law, being "everlasting
   destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his
   power." (John viii. 24; ix, 41; 2 Thess. i. 9.)

   XIII. To each of these decrees, that of predestination and that of
   reprobation, is subjoined its execution; the acts of which are
   performed in that order in which they have been appointed in and by the
   decree itself; and the objects both of the decree and of its execution
   are the same, and entirely uniform, or invested with the same formal
   relation. (Psalm cxv. 3; xxxiii, 9, 11.)

   XIV. Great is the use of this doctrine, as thus delivered from the
   Scriptures. For it serves to establish the glory of the grace of God,
   to console afflicted consciences, to terrify the wicked and to drive
   away their security. (1.) But it establishes the grace of God, when it
   ascribes the whole praise of our vocation, justification, adoption, and
   glorification, to the mercy of God alone, and takes it entirely away
   from our own strength, works and merits. (Rom. viii. 29, 30; Ephes. 1.)
   (2.) It comforts afflicted consciences that are struggling with
   temptation, when it renders them assured of the gracious good will of
   God in Christ, which was from all eternity decreed to them, performed
   in time, and which will endure forever. (Isa. liv. 8.) It also shews,
   that the purpose of God according to election stands firm, not of
   works, but of Him that calleth. (1 Cor. i. 9; Rom. ix. 11.) (3.) It is
   capable of terrifying the ungodly; because it teaches, that the decree
   of God concerning unbelievers is irrevocable; (Heb. iii. 11, 17- 19;)
   and that "they who do not obey the truth, but believe a lie," are to be
   adjudged to eternal destruction. (2 Thess. ii. 12.)

   XV. This doctrine therefore ought to resound, not only within private
   walls and in schools, but also in the assemblies of the saints and in
   the church of God. Yet one caution ought to be strictly observed, that
   nothing be taught concerning it beyond what the Scriptures say, that it
   be propounded in the manner which the Scriptures have adopted, and that
   it be referred to the same end as that which the Scriptures propose
   when they deliver it. This, by the gracious assistance of God, we
   think, we have done. "Unto Him be glory in the church by Christ Jesus
   throughout all ages, world without end. Amen!"

   "The power of God is great, but it obtains glory from the humble. Do
   not inconsiderately seek out the things that are too hard for thee;
   neither foolishly search for things which surpass thy powers. But
   meditate with reverence upon those things which God has commanded thee:
   for it is not requisite for thee to see with thine eyes those things
   which are secret. Do not curiously handle those matters which are
   unprofitable and unnecessary to thy discourse: for more things are
   shewn unto thee, than the human understanding can comprehend.
   Ecclesiasticus iii. 20-23.
     __________________________________________________________________

  DISPUTATION 16

  ON THE VOCATION OF MEN TO SALVATION

  RESPONDENT: JAMES BONTEBAL

   I. The title contains three terms--vocation, men, salvation, (1.) The
   word Vocation denotes a total and entire act, consisting of all its
   parts, whether essential or integral, what parts soever are necessary
   for the purpose of men being enabled to answer the Divine Vocation.
   (Prov. i. 24; Matt. xi. 20, 21; xxiii, 37.) (2.) Men may be considered
   in a two-fold respect, either as placed in the state of animal life
   without sin, or as obnoxious to sin. We consider them here in this last
   respect. (Gen. ii. 16, 17; Matt. ix. 13.) (3.) Salvation, by a
   Synecdoche, in addition to vocation itself by which we are called to
   salvation, contains also whatsoever is necessary, through the
   appointment of God, for obtaining salvation or life eternal (Luke xix.
   9; 2 Cor. vi. 2.)

   II. We define Vocation, a gracious act of God in Christ, by which,
   through his word and Spirit, He calls forth sinful men, who are liable
   to condemnation and placed under the dominion of sin, from the
   condition of the animal life, and from the pollutions and corruptions
   of this world, (2 Tim. i. 9; Matt. xi. 28; 1 Pet. ii. 9, 10; Gal. i. 4;
   2 Pet. ii. 20; Rom. x. 13-15; 1 Pet. iii. 19; Gen. vi. 3,) unto "the
   fellowship of Jesus Christ," and of his kingdom and its benefits; that,
   being united unto Him as their Head, they may derive from him life,
   sensation, motion, and a plenitude of every spiritual blessing, to the
   glory of God and their own salvation. (1 Cor. i. 9; Gal. ii. 20; Ephes.
   i. 3, 6; 2 Thess. ii. 13, 14.)

   III. The efficient cause of this vocation is God the Father in the Son.
   The Son himself, as appointed by the Father to be the Mediator and the
   king of his church, calls men by the Holy Spirit; as He is the Spirit
   of God given to the Mediator; and as He is the Spirit of Christ the
   king and the head of his church, by whom both "the Father and the Son
   hitherto work" (1 Thess. ii. 12; Ephes. ii. 17; iv, 11, 12; Rev. iii.
   20; John v. 17.) But this vocation is so administered by the Spirit,
   that the Holy Spirit is himself its effector: for He appoints bishops,
   sends forth teachers, endues them with gifts, grants them his
   assistance, and obtains authority for the word and bestows efficacy
   upon it. (Heb. iii. 7; Acts xiii. 2; xx, 28; 1 Cor. xii. 4, 7, 9, 11;
   Heb. ii. 4.)

   IV. The Inly-moving cause is the grace, mercy and (philanthropy) "love
   of God our saviour toward man;" (Tit. iii. 4, 5;) by which He is
   inclined to relieve the misery of sinful man, and to impart unto him
   eternal felicity. (2 Tim. i. 9, 10.) But the disposing cause is the
   wisdom and justice of God; by which he knows how it is proper for this
   vocation to be administered, and wills it to be dispensed as it is
   lawful and befitting; and from which is formed the decree of his will
   concerning the administration and its mode. (1 Cor. i. 17, 18.)

   V. The external cause, which outwardly moves God, is Jesus Christ by
   his obedience and intercession. (2 Tim. i. 9.) But the instrumental
   cause is the word of God, administered by means of men, either through
   preaching or writing, which is the ordinary method; (1 Cor. xii. 28-30;
   2 Thess. ii. 14;) or without human assistance, when the word is
   immediately proposed by God inwardly to the mind and the will, which is
   extraordinary. And this is in fact both the word of the law and that of
   the Gospel, which are subordinate in the operations apportioned to each
   other.

   VI. The matter or subject of vocation is mankind constituted in the
   animal life; men worldly, natural, animal, carnal, sinful, alienated
   from the life of God, and dead in sins; and therefore Unworthy to be
   called, and Unfit to answer to the call, unless by the gracious
   estimation of God they be accounted worthy, and by his powerful
   operation they be rendered Fit to comply with the vocation. (Matt. ix.
   13; Tit. ii. 12; Ephes. ii. 11, 12; iv, 17, 18; v, 14; John v. 25; vi,
   44; Matt. x. 11-13; Acts xvi. 14.)

   VII. The form of vocation is placed in the very administration of the
   word and of the Holy Spirit. God hath instituted this administration
   so, as He knows to be suitable and becoming to himself, and to his
   justice tempered with mercy in Christ; always reserving to himself the
   fall and free power of not employing, for the conversion of men, all
   the methods which are possible to himself according to the treasures of
   his wisdom and power, and of bestowing unequal grace on those who are
   [in every respect,] equals, and equal grace on those who are unequal,
   nay, of employing greater grace on those who are more wicked. (Rom. ix.
   21-26; x, 17-21; xi, 25, 29-33; Ezek. iii. 6; Matt. xi. 21, 23.)

   VIII. But in every vocation the point of commencement, and that of
   termination, come to be considered. The point of commencement, whence
   men are called by divine vocation, is not only the state of this animal
   life, but likewise that of sin and of misery on account of sin, that
   is, out of guilt and condemnation. (1 Pet. ii. 9; 2 Pet. i. 4; Ephes.
   ii. 1-6; Rom. vi. 17, 18.) The point of termination is, First, the
   state of grace, or a participation of supernatural good and of every
   spiritual blessing, during the present life, in Christ, in whom resides
   a plenitude of grace and truth; and, Afterwards, the state of glory,
   and the perfect fruition of God himself. (Ephes. i. 3, 4,; John i. 14,
   16; Rom. viii. 28-30.)

   IX. The proximate end of vocation is, that they who have been called
   answer by faith to God and to Christ who give the call, and that they
   thus become the covenanted people of God through Christ the Mediator of
   the New Covenant; and, after having become believers and parties to the
   covenant, that they love, fear, honour, and worship God and Christ,
   render in all things obedience to the divine precepts "in righteousness
   and true holiness," and that by this means they "make their calling and
   election sure." (Prov. i. 24,; Heb. iii. 7; Rev. iii. 20; Ephes. ii.
   11-16; Tit. iii. 8; Deut. vi. 4, 5; Jer. xxxii. 38, 39; Luke i. 74, 75;
   2 Pet. i. 1, 10.)

   X. The remote end is the salvation of the elect and the glory of God,
   in regard to which the very vocation to grace is a means ordained by
   God, yet through the appointment of God it is necessary to the
   communication of salvation. (Phil. i. 6; Ephes. i. 14.) But the answer
   by which obedience is yielded to this call, is the condition which,
   through the appointment of God, is also requisite and necessary for
   obtaining this end. (Prov. i. 24-26; Acts xiii. 46; Luke vii. 30.) The
   glory of God, who is supremely wise, good, merciful, just and powerful,
   is so luminously displayed in this communication both of his grace and
   glory, as deservedly to raise into rapturous admiration the minds of
   angels and men, and to employ their loosened tongues in celebrating the
   praises of Jehovah. (Rev. iv. 8-11; v, 8-10.)

   XI. Vocation is partly external, partly internal. External vocation is
   by the ministry of men, who propound the word of the law and of the
   gospel, and who are on this account called "workers together with God,
   planters, waterers, builders, and ministers by whom the [members of
   the] church believe." (1 Cor. i. 5-9; iii, 3-6.) Internal vocation is
   by the operation of the Holy Spirit illuminating the mind and affecting
   the heart, that serious attention may be given to those things which
   are spoken, and that faith or credence may be given to the word. The
   efficacy consists in the concurrence of both the internal and external
   vocation. (Acts xvi. 14; 2 Cor. iii. 3; 1 Pet. i. 22.)

   XII. But that distribution is not of a genus into its species, but of a
   whole into its parts, or of the entire vocation into partial acts which
   concur to produce one conclusion--which is, obedience yielded to the
   call. Hence an assemblage, or congregation of those who are called, and
   of those who answer to the call, is denominated "the Church;" (1 Cor.
   iii. 5, 6; Rom. i. 5;) which is itself, in the same manner,
   distinguished into the visible and the invisible--the visible, that
   "maketh confession with the mouth," and the invisible, "that believeth
   with the heart." (Rom. x. 10.) As man himself is likewise distinguished
   into "the outward" and "the inward." (2 Cor. iv. 16.)

   XIII. But we must be cautious, lest with the mystics and the
   enthusiasts, we consider the word which is propounded by the ministry
   of men as only preparatory; and believe that another word is inwardly
   employed, which is perfective, or, (which is the same thing,) lest we
   suppose, that the Spirit by his internal act illuminates the mind into
   another knowledge of God and Christ, than that which is contained in
   the word outwardly propounded, or that he affects the heart and the
   soul with other meanings, than those which are proposed from the very
   same word. (1 Pet. i. 23, 25; Rom. x. 14-17; 2 Cor. iii. 3-6; 1 Cor.
   xv. 1-4.)

   XIV. The accidental result of vocation, and that which is not of itself
   intended by God, is the rejection of the word of grace, the contemning
   of the divine counsel, the resistance offered to the Holy Spirit. The
   proper and per se cause of this result is, the malice and hardness of
   the human heart. But this result is, not seldom, succeeded by another,
   the just judgment of God, avenging the contempt shewn to his word and
   call, and the injury done to his Holy Spirit; and from this judgment
   arise the blinding of the mind, the hardening of the heart, "the giving
   over to a reprobate mind," and "the delivering unto the power of
   Satan." (Acts xiii. 46; Luke vii. 30; Acts vii. 51; 2 Thess. iii. 2; 2
   Cor. iv. 4; Psalm lxxxi. 11-14; Isa. lxiii. 10; vi, 9, 10; John xii.
   37-40.)

   XV. But, because "known unto our God are all his works from the
   beginning of the world," (Acts xv. 18,) and as God does nothing in time
   which He has not decreed from all eternity to do, this vocation is
   likewise instituted and administered according to God's eternal decree.
   So that what man soever is called in time, was from all eternity
   predestinated to be called, and to be called in that state, time,
   place, mode, and with that efficacy, in and with which he was
   predestinated. Otherwise, the execution will vary from the decree;
   which charge of mutability and change cannot be preferred against God
   without producing mischievous effects. (Ephes. iii. 5, 6, 9-11; James
   i. 17, 18; 2 Tim. i. 9.)
     __________________________________________________________________

  DISPUTATION 17

  ON REPENTANCE

  RESPONDENT: HENRY NIELLUIS

   As in succeeding Disputations are discussed Faith, and Justification
   through Faith, the order which has hitherto been observed requires us
   now to treat on Repentance without which we can neither have fellowship
   with Christ, nor be made partakers of his righteousness.

   I. The matter on which we are at present treating, is usually
   enunciated in the three Latin words, resipiscentia, pnitentia, and
   conversio, repentance, penitence and conversion. The Greek word,
   Metanoia "change of mind after reflection," answers to the first of
   these, terms;

   Metameleia, "regret on account of misdeeds," to the second; and
   Ewisrofh "a turning about, a return," to the third. On this subject the
   Hebrews frequently employ the word h b w t "a returning," as
   corresponding with the third of the preceding terms; and the word  j n
   or h m j n which expresses the sense of the second. But though these
   words are, according to the essence and nature of the thing,
   synonymous, yet each of them signifies a particular formal conception.
   The First, repentance, is a conception of the understanding; the
   Second, penitence, a conception of the affections or passions; and the
   Third, conversion, is a conception of an action resulting from both the
   others. The general term, therefore, comprises the understanding, the
   affections, and an ulterior act resulting from both the preceding. The
   First signifies a change of mind after any thing has been done; and,
   after the commission of evil, a change of mind to a better state. The
   Second expresses grief or sorrow of mind after a deed; and, after an
   evil deed, "sorrow after a godly sort," and not "the sorrow of the
   world," although the word is sometimes thus used even in the
   Scriptures. The Third denotes conversion to some thing, from which
   aversion had been previously formed. And, in this discussion, it is
   that conversion which is from evil to good; from sin, Satan and the
   world, to God. The First comprehends a disapproval of evil and an
   approval of the opposite good. The Second comprises grief for a past
   evil, and an affection of desire towards a contrary good. The Third
   shews an aversion from the evil to which it adhered, and a conversion
   to the good from which it had been alienated. But these three
   conceptions, according to the nature of things and the command of God,
   are so intimately connected with each other, that there cannot be
   either true and right repentance, penitence, or conversion, unless each
   of these has the other two united with it, either as preceding it, or
   as succeeding.

   II. According to this distinction of the various conceptions, have been
   invented different definitions of one and the same thing as to its
   essence. For instance, "repentance is a change of mind and heart from
   evil to good, proceeding from godly sorrow." It is also "sorrow after
   the commission of sin on account of God being offended, and through
   this sorrow a change of the whole heart from evil to good." And "It is
   a true conversion of our life to God, proceeding from a sincere and
   serious fear of God, which consists in the mortification of our flesh
   and of the old man, and in the quickening of the Spirit." We disapprove
   of none of these three definitions, because in substance and essence
   they agree among themselves, and, sufficiently for [the purposes of]
   true piety, declare the nature of the thing. But a more copious
   definition may be given, such as the following: "Repentance, penitence,
   or conversion is an act of the entire man, by which in his
   understanding he disapproves of sin universally considered, in his
   affections he hates it, and as perpetrated by himself is sorry for it
   and in the whole of his life avoids it. By which he also in his
   understanding approves of righteousness, in affections loves it, and in
   the whole of his life follows after it. And thus he turns himself away
   from Satan and the world, and returns unto God and adheres to Him, that
   God may abide in him, and that he may abide in God."

   III. We call repentance "the act of man," that we may distinguish it
   from Regeneration which is "the act of God." These two have some things
   in common, are on certain points in affinity; yet, in reality,
   according to the peculiar nature which each of them possesses, they are
   distinct; though, according to their subjects, they are not separated.
   We add that it is "the act of the entire man:" for it is his act with
   regard to the entire mind or soul, and all its faculties; and with
   regard to the body as it is united to the soul, and is an organ or
   instrument subjected to the pleasure and command of the soul. (1 Kings
   xviii. 37; Rom. xii. 1, 2.) It is an act which concerns the whole life
   of man as it is rational, and as it was born with an aptitude to tend
   towards sin and towards God, and to turn aside from either of them. It
   consists of the understanding, the affections, the senses, and motion,
   and concurs with all these conjointly, though subordinately, to [the
   production of] repentance, penitence or conversion. (1.) In this act,
   the Understanding performs its office both by a general appreciation of
   its value and by its particular approbation and disapprobation. (2.)
   The Affections or passions perform theirs, as they are ewiqumhtikov
   concupiscible, by loving, hating, mourning and rejoicing; and as they
   are qumoeidhv, irascible, by being angry, zealous, indignant, fearful,
   and hopeful. (Ephes. 3 & 4.) (3.) The Senses, both internal and
   external, perform their office by their aversion from unbecoming
   objects, and by their conversion to those which are suitable and
   proper. (Rom. vi. 13, 19.) (4.) Lastly, the Motions of the tongue,
   hands, feet, and of the other members of the body, perform their office
   by removal from things unlawful and inexpedient, and by their
   application to those which are lawful and expedient.

   IV. The object of repentance is the evil of unrighteousness or sin,
   (considered both universally, and as committed by the penitent
   himself,) and the good of righteousness. (Psalm xxxiv. 15; Ezek. xviii.
   28.) The evil of unrighteousness is first in order, the good of
   righteousness is first in dignity. From the former, repentance has its
   commencement; in the latter, it terminates and rests. The object may be
   considered in a manner somewhat different; for, since we are commanded
   to return to God, from whom we had turned away, God is also the object
   of conversion and repentance, as he is the hater of sin and of evil
   men, the lover of righteousness and of righteous men, good to those who
   repent, and their chief good, and, on the contrary, the severe avenger
   and the certain destruction of those who persevere in sin. (Mal. v. 7;
   Zech. i. 3; Deut. vi. 5.) To this object, may be directly opposed
   another personal object, the devil, from whom by repentance we must
   take our departure. (Ephes. iv. 27; James iv. 7.) To the devil may be
   added an object which is an accessory to him, and that is, the world,
   of which he is called "the prince," (John xii. 31; xiv, 30,) both as it
   contains within it arguments suitable for Satan to employ in seduction,
   such as riches, honours and pleasures, (Luke iv. 5, 6; 1 John ii. 15,
   16,) and as it renders to the devil something that resembles personal
   service. (Rom. vi. 9, 7.) In both these methods, the world attracts men
   to itself, and detains them after they are united to it. From it, also,
   we are commanded to turn away. Nay, man himself may obtain the province
   of an object opposed to God; and he is commanded to separate himself
   from himself, that he may live not according to man, but according to
   God. (Ephes. iv. 22; Col. iii. 9- 17; Rom. vi. 10-23.)

   V. The primary efficient cause of repentance is God, and Christ as he
   is through the Spirit mediator between God and man. (Jer. xxxi. 18;
   Ezek. xxxvi. 25, 26; Acts v. 31; xvii, 30.) The inly moving cause is
   the goodness, grace, and philanthropy of God our creator and redeemer,
   who loves the salvation of his creature, and desires to manifest the
   riches of his mercy in the salvation of his miserable creature. (Rom.
   xi. 5.) The outwardly moving cause, through the mode of merit, is the
   obedience, the death and the intercession of Christ; (Isa. liii. 5; 1
   Cor. i. 30, 31; 2 Cor. v. 21;) and, through the mode of moving to
   mercy, it is the unhappy condition of sinners, whom the devil holds
   captive in the snares of iniquity, and who will perish by their own
   demerits according to the condition of the law, and necessarily
   according to the will of God manifested in the gospel, unless they
   repent (John iii. 16; Ezek. xvi. 3-63; Luke xiii. 3, 5; Isa. xxxi. 6;
   Jer. iii, 14; Psalm cxix. 71; in the prophets passim; Rom. vii. 6, 7.)

   VI. The proximate, yet less principal cause, is man himself, converted
   and converting himself by the power and efficacy of the grace of God
   and the Spirit of Christ. The external cause inciting to repent is the
   miserable state of the sinners who do not repent, and the felicitous
   and blessed state of those who repent--whether such state be known from
   the law of Moses or from that of nature, from the gospel or from
   personal experience, or from the examples of other persons who have
   been visited with the most grievous plagues through impenitence, or
   who, through repentance, have been made partakers of many blessings.
   (Rom. ii. 5; Acts ii. 37.) The internal and inly moving cause is, not
   only a consciousness of sin and a sense of misery through fear of the
   Deity, who has been offended, with a desire to be delivered from both,
   but it is likewise [an incipient] faith and hope of the gracious mercy
   and pardon of God.

   VII. The instrumental causes which God ordinarily uses for our
   conversion, and by which we are solicited and led to repentance, are
   the law and the gospel. Yet the office of each in this matter is quite
   distinct, so that the more excellent province in it is assigned to the
   gospel, and the law acts the part of its servant or attendant. For, in
   the first place, the very command to repent is evangelical; and the
   promise of pardon, and the peremptory threat of eternal destruction,
   unless the man repents, which are added to it, belong peculiarly to the
   gospel. (Matt. iii. 1; Mark i. 4; Luke xxiv. 47.) But the law proves
   the necessity of repentance, by convincing man of sin and of the anger
   of the offended Deity, from which conviction arise a certain sorrow and
   a fear of punishment, which, in its commencement is servile or slavish
   solely through a regard to the law, but which, in its progress, becomes
   a filial fear through a view of the gospel. (Rom. iii. 13, 20; vii, 7.)
   From these, also, proceed, by the direction of an inducement to remove,
   or repent, a certain external abstinence from evil works, and such a
   performance of some righteousness as is not hypocritical. (Matt. iii.
   8; vii, 17; James ii. 14-26.) But as the law does not proceed beyond
   "the ministration of death and of the letter," the services of the
   gospel here again become necessary, which administers the Spirit, by
   whose illumination, inspiration and gracious and efficacious
   strengthening, repentance itself, in its essential and integral parts
   is completed and perfected. Nay the very conviction of sin belongs in
   some measure to the gospel, since sin itself has been committed against
   the command both concerning faith and repentance. (Mark xvi. 16; John
   xvi. 8-15.)

   VIII. There are likewise other causes aiding or auxiliary to
   repentance, some of which are usually employed by God himself, and
   others of them by those who are penitent. (1.) For God sometimes sends
   the cross and afflictions, by which, as with goads, he excites and
   invites to repentance. At other times, he visits them with the contrary
   blessings, that he may lead them, after having been invited, by
   goodness and lenity to repentance. (1 Cor. xi. 32; Jer. xxxi. 18; Psalm
   80 & 85.) (2.) The causes employed by penitents themselves are
   watching, fasting, and other corporeal chastisements, as well as
   prayers, which are of the greatest efficacy in obtaining and performing
   repentance. The other causes employed by men are likewise serviceable
   in exciting the ardour of these prayers. (Psalm 119; Rom. ii. 4; v, 3,
   4; xii, 11, 12.) It is possible for this relation to exist between
   these auxiliary and the preceding instrumental causes, ( 7,) that the
   auxiliary causes are subservient to the instrumental, since they excite
   men to a serious and assiduous meditation on the law and the gospel,
   and by the grace of God obtain yet more and more a right understanding
   of both.

   IX. The form of repentance is the uprightness of the turning away from
   evil, and of the return to God and to righteousness. It is conformed to
   the rule of the divine command, and is produced by an assured faith and
   hope of the divine mercy, and by a sincere intention to turn away and
   to return. As the penitence of Saul, Ahab and Judas was destitute of
   this uprightness, it is unworthy to be reckoned under this title. (1
   Sam. xv. 24, 25; 1 Kings xxi. 27; Matt. xxvii. 3.) But since the mind
   of the penitent is conscious to itself of this rectitude, or
   uprightness, no necessity exists for such a man anxiously and
   solicitously to examine whether it be so great, either intensively,
   extensively, or appreciatively, as the rigor of justice might demand.

   X. The fruits of repentance, which may also have the relation of ends,
   are, (1.) On the part of God, the remission of sin according to the
   condition of the covenant of grace in Christ, and on account of his
   obedience, and through faith in him. (Luke xxiv. 47; Acts v. 31; Rom.
   iii. 24) (2.) On our part, the fruits are good works, which are "meet
   for repentance," (Matt. iii. 8; Luke iii. 8,) and "which God
   foreordained," that believers and penitents, who are "created in Christ
   Jesus unto good works, should walk in them." (Ephes. ii. 10.) The
   ultimate end is the glory of God the Redeemer, who is at once just and
   merciful in Jesus Christ our Lord. (Rev. xvi. 9.) It results not only
   from the gracious and efficacious act of God, who bestows repentance,
   and converts us to himself; but likewise from the act of the penitents
   themselves, by which turning themselves away from sins, and returning
   to God, they "walk in newness of living" all the days of their life. It
   also results from the very intention of repentance itself.

   XI. The parts of repentance, as is abundantly evident from the
   preceding Theses, according to its two boundaries, (both that from
   which it commences, and that towards which it proceeds and in which it
   terminates,) are two, an aversion, or turning away from the Devil and
   sin, and a conversion or returning to God and righteousness. (Psalm
   xxxiv. 14; Jer. iv. 1.) They are united together by an indissoluble
   connection; but the former is preparatory to the latter, while the
   latter is perfective of the former. The Papists, however, make
   penitence to consist of three parts; and seem to derive greater
   pleasure from employing the word penitence about this matter, than in
   the use of the terms repentance and conversion. Their three parts are,
   the contrition of the heart, the confession of the mouth, and the
   satisfaction of the work; about which we make two brief affirmations.
   (1.) If these be received as parts of the penitence which is necessary
   before God, then no contrition can be so great, either intensively or
   appreciatively, as to be in any wise either meritorious or capable of
   obtaining remission of sins. No confession of the mouth, not even that
   which is made to God, (provided the confession of the heart only be
   present,) is necessary to receive remission; much less is the
   confession which is made to any man, even though he be a priest. And
   there is no satisfaction, except the obedience of the passion of our
   Lord Jesus Christ, by which the justice of God can be satisfied either
   for sin or for its punishment, even for the very least of either. (Acts
   iv. 12; Heb. x. 10, 14; 1 Cor. i. 30.) (2.) If these be received as
   part of the penitence to which, before the church, that man submits who
   has injured her by scandal, that he may render her satisfaction and may
   contribute to her edification; then indeed those words, [contrition,
   confession and satisfaction,] may bear an accommodated sense, and such
   a distribution of them may be useful to the church.

   XII. The contrary to repentance is impenitence, and a pertinacious
   perseverance in sinning: of which there are two degrees, one the delay
   of penitence, the other final impenitence unto death. The latter of
   them has a certain expectation of eternal destruction, even according
   to the most merciful will of God revealed in Christ and in the Gospel;
   lest any one should persuade himself, that the devils themselves, and
   men who have passed their lives in impiety, will at length experience
   the mercy of God. The former of them, the delay of penitence, is
   marvelously dangerous, for three reasons: (1.) Because it is in the
   power and hand of God to make even the delay of a single hour to be a
   final impenitence, since to Him belongs the dominion and lordship over
   our life and death. (2.) Because after a habit of sinning has been
   introduced by daily exercise, a man is rendered anaisqhtov, incapable
   of feeling, and his conscience becomes "seared with a hot iron." (1
   Tim. iv, 2.) (3.) Because, after the gate of grace has by the just
   judgment of God been closed on account of a malicious continuance in
   sins, no passage is open for the Spirit, who is necessarily the author
   of repentance. Therefore let these words always resound in our ears,
   "Today if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts." (Heb. iii.
   7, 8; Psalm xcv. 7, 8.) And this exhortation of the Apostle, "Workout
   your own salvation with fear and trembling: for it is God who worketh
   in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure," (Phil. ii. 12,
   13.) May this be graciously granted to us by God the Father of mercies,
   in the Son of his love, by the Holy Spirit of both of them. To whom be
   praise and glory forever. Amen.

   COROLLARIES

   It is not a correct saying, that "to those who relapse after having
   been baptized, penitence is a second plank [for their escape] after
   shipwreck."

   Those persons act harshly who, from the example of God not pardoning
   sins except to him that is penitent, refuse to forgive their brother
   unless he confesses his fault, and earnestly begs pardon.
     __________________________________________________________________

  DISPUTATION 18

  ON THE CHURCH AND ITS HEAD

  RESPONDENT: GERARD, THE SON OF HELMICHIUS

   As it is of the greatest utility to hold a right belief about the
   church of God and its Head, and as there is at present a great
   controversy between the Orthodox and the Papists respecting this
   matter, it appears to us that we shall not be profitably occupied , if
   we treat of the Church and of its Head in a few Theses.

   I. The Church, ecclesia, is a word of Greek origin, used in the Greek
   version of the Old Testament for the Hebrew word l h q , "the
   assembly;" (Deut. xxiii. 2; Judges xx. 2) and properly signifies a
   "congregation of persons called out," from the very etymology of the
   word and from the most frequent usage of the Sacred writings, without
   any distinction of the small or the great number of those who belong to
   such an assemblage. For sometimes it signifies the universal assembly
   of all those who have been called out; (Acts xx. 28; Ephes. i. 22;) at
   other times, an extraordinary multitude; (Acts ii. 41, 47;) and at
   other times, only a few persons, comprised in a single family. (Rom.
   xvi. 5.) This diversity in its application is made on account of one
   essential reason in all of them; and as this reason belongs equally to
   an assembly of few persons, of many, and of all, these several
   assemblages equally partake of the name of "the church," with this
   difference alone, that a congregation consisting of numerous members is
   called a greater church, but not more a church, according to the axiom
   of the Logicians, "A substance does not receive more and less."

   II. According to this very general notion the church of God is defined,
   "A congregation of men called forth by God, out of their own nature,
   into the supernatural dignity of adoption as sons of God to his glory,
   and of those who answer this call of God." For the act of vocation, as
   proceeding from God who calls, and as properly received by those who
   are called, completes his church. Under this definition are likewise
   comprehended those angels who are called in Scripture "the elect;" (1
   Tim. v. 21;) whether they be considered as an assembly separated from
   men, or as belonging to one church with men. (Psalm lxviii. 17; Jude.
   14; Rev. v. 11; Heb. xii. 22.) According to this notion, the church,
   embracing all, is especially called "Catholic." But omitting any
   further mention of angels, about whose vocation the Scriptures speak
   sparingly, we will contemplate the church as consisting of human
   beings. We must here consider men in two respects--according to the
   primeval state in which they were created after the image of God, and
   in reference to their fall from that state into corruption and misery.

   III. Because, when men are considered in their primitive state, they
   were created to be not only what they actually were, but likewise to be
   elevated to a state of higher felicity, agreeing with the image of God;
   bearing the impress of which, as children they resembled their Heavenly
   Father; (Gen. i. 27; Luke iii. 38;) therefore, in this state, theirs
   was the calling forth, by which they were called out from nature and
   natural felicity to partake of the fruit of Divine adoption, by the
   observance of the law which had been imposed on them, and which had
   been sanctioned by the promise of a life of blessedness assured to them
   through the sacrament of the tree of life, (Gen. ii. 9, 10,) and by a
   threat of death. They were therefore the church of God, neither
   redeemed by the blood of Christ, nor formed anew by regeneration of the
   Spirit, nor by a new creation, but they were instituted as a church by
   the primitive creation of God, and formed by a vocation according to
   the legal covenant.

   IV. Before the fall, this church in reality consisted only of our first
   parents, Adam and Eve; but in capacity it embraced the whole of the
   human race that were included in their loins, and that were afterwards
   to proceed from them by natural propagation. This was done by God's
   constant and perpetual ordinance, according to which he included all
   their posterity in the covenant into which He had entered with the
   parents, provided the parents continued in this covenant. (Gen. xvii.
   7; Rom. v. 12, 14.) And in this respect, the church before the fall may
   take to itself the epithet of "Catholic." But, as a promise of the
   remission of sins was not annexed to this covenant, when our first
   parents transgressed this law, which had been imposed as a trial of
   obedience, they fell from the covenant and ceased to be the church of
   God, (Jer. xi. 3,) they were expelled from the tree of life and out of
   Paradise, the symbols of life eternal and of the place in which it was
   to be enjoyed, and were thus by nature rendered "children of wrath."
   (Gen. 3.)

   V. Wherefore, if a church was to be again collected from among men, it
   was to be called out from that state of sin and misery; but it was to
   be collected through the decree of the gracious mercy of God. He
   therefore employed such a mode of calling the members forth as was
   agreeable to that state, that is, the institution of a new and gracious
   covenant, as the word is used in the writings of the evangelism. (Jer.
   xxxi. 33; Matt. xxvi. 28.) This covenant exhibits remission of sins
   ratified by the blood of the Mediator, Christ the only begotten Son of
   God, and the Spirit of grace through faith in Him. (Heb. ix. 15; Gal.
   iii. 2, 5; iv, 19.) To a participation in this covenant men have been
   called "in divers manners," according to the economy of time most
   wisely arranged by God. First, by the declaration or solemn promise of
   the blessed seed, (Gen. iii. 15; Rom. i. 2,) when the heir was by
   appointment constituted an infant: wherefore He was also to be detained
   for a time under the preparatory discipline of the law economically
   repeated. Afterwards, by that full manifestation in the Gospel, when,
   according to "the time appointed of God the Father," the heir had
   arrived at maturity. (Gal. iv. 1-4; Matt. xi. 11-13.)

   VI. But this economic distinction, and this diversity in the method of
   calling forth, do not make a double and in substance a different
   church. For it is one and the same person that is an infant and
   afterwards a full-grown man, not distinguished except with regard to
   age and advancement according to increased age. But the whole church,
   both before and after Christ, is called one heir. (Gal. 4.) The whole
   church, collected together from among the Jews and the Gentiles, is
   also called "one new man;" and not from those Jews only who lived after
   the advent of Christ, but likewise from those who lived prior to his
   coming, when the Gentiles were without Christ," being then aliens from
   the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of
   promise." (Ephes. ii. 12-15.) The church is one city, the heavenly
   Jerusalem, "the mother of all" those who are blessed with faithful
   Abraham, and who, "as Isaac was, are the children of promise." (Gal.
   iv. 26-28.) It is also one house of God founded upon Christ the chief
   corner-stone, which has been laid in a foundation the most firm and
   stable, through the preaching not only of the apostles, but likewise of
   the prophets, (Ephes. ii. 20-22,) to the latter of whom also belong
   Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, as well as Moses himself, who according to
   the authority of the promise was a son, (Heb. xi. 24-26,) although a
   servant in the house with regard to the economical legislation which
   was administered by his hands. (iii, 4.)

   VII. This assembly being distinguished in the manner already described,
   by the names of "the one heir" and "the one new man," of "the one city"
   and "the one house of God," is in the most ample signification and in
   the widest latitude called "the Catholic Church," collected together
   from among men of every period and age from the first promise of the
   seed of the woman to the end of the world, and of all places; men who
   have been called forth to the participation of the grace of God, and to
   the service of his glory; and who are obedient to this Divine calling.
   (Heb. 11; xii, 22- 24.) It is distributed into two integral members,
   each of which is homogeneous and similar to the whole; that is, into
   the church before Christ, and that after Him: (Gal. iv. 1-4; Heb. xi.
   40.) But as a discussion upon their agreement and difference will be a
   labour rather too prolix, we will not enter into it on this occasion:
   omitting therefore the peculiar consideration of that which was before
   Christ, our further attention shall be directed to that which is
   specially called "Christian," yet not to the entire exclusion of the
   other.

   VIII. We may be permitted, therefore, to define the Christian church,
   "A congregation of believers, who have been called by the saving
   vocation of God from the state of corruption to the dignity of the sons
   of God through the gospel, and are by a true faith engrafted into
   Christ, as living members are to the Head, to the praise of the
   glorious grace of God. (Matt. v. 15, 16; Acts iv. 31; 1 Pet. ii. 9; v,
   10; Rom. viii. 28-30; vi, 5; Ephes. iii. 17; v, 30.) This, as a general
   definition, belongs to every congregation of believers, whether it be
   small or large; it also appertains to the Catholic church, which
   contains the entire number of believers from the time when Christ came
   into his kingdom unto the consummation of all things: which universal
   company we properly describe, if we add these few words to the previous
   description, "Of all the believers who have been called out from every
   tongue, tribe, people, nation and vocation," &c. From this it is
   apparent, that the Catholic or universal church differs from particular
   churches in nothing which relates to the substance of the church, but
   solely in its amplitude: an argument which ought to be diligently
   observed in our controversy with the Papists.

   IX. The efficient cause of the church, that both produces her by
   regeneration and preserves her by daily education, and that perfects
   her by an immediate union of her to himself, is God the Father, in his
   well beloved Son Jesus Christ, by the Spirit of Christ who is the
   Redeemer and the Head of the church. (2 Tim. i. 9; 1 Pet. i. 12.) We
   view the gospel as the instrument, that is, "the incorruptible seed by
   which the church is born again." (1 Pet. i. 23, 25.) Hence those
   persons also whom God appointed to be ministers of the Gospel, were the
   instrumental causes, and are called "co-operators," or "workers
   together with God," of whom some are employed in laying the foundation,
   others in raising the superstructure. (1 Cor. iii. 5, 10; Rev. xv.
   18-21; Ephes. ii. 20.) They are indeed the founders of many particular
   churches, by their oral preaching; but by their writings which have
   been delivered down to us, they are the founders of all churches and of
   the whole Catholic church; on this account the entire church of Christ
   is called Apostolical.

   X. We call the act of this cause that produces the church, and
   preserves her, "a calling forth." This word includes, First, the point
   from which a commencement is made to that in which it terminates, and,
   then, the means by which men proceed from the one to the other. (1.)
   The point of commencement is the state of sin and misery, in which
   state, a sinner without the law is at ease and flatters himself; but to
   which a sinner is averse who is under the law through the vocation
   previously administered by the legal spirit, that is, the spirit of
   bondage, and from which he desires to be delivered. (Matt. ix. 13; xi,
   28; Rom. 7.) The point of termination is the dignity of being adopted
   as the sons of God, which, also, with respect to the desire of those
   who have been called forth, may be fitly denominated their end. (2.)
   The means by which men proceed from the one point to the other, is
   faith in Christ, by which we obtain this dignity, and are "translated
   from the kingdom of darkness into the kingdom of light" and of the Son
   of God, through the decree of divine predestination. (Jer. i. 12; Col.
   i. 13; Acts xvi. 17.)

   XI. Hence it will easily appear what it is that we have laid down as
   the matter or substance of this calling forth, about which it is
   conversant, and in which it exercises its operation. Sinners are the
   remote matter; for to them alone is an entrance into this way
   necessary. The still nearer matter are sinners through the law
   acknowledging their sins, deploring their state, and expecting
   redemption. (Gal. ii. 15, 16, 21; Matt. ix. 13; xi, 28; Rom. viii.
   28-30.) Believers are the proximate matter, who, alone, are called to
   the fellowship of Jesus Christ, and to a participation of the
   inheritance which he has purchased for his children with his own blood,
   and of which he is constituted the dispenser to those who obey him.
   (Heb. v. 9.) For however perfect in the act, vocation is, when it has
   proceeded from Him who calls us, yet a relative effect is required for
   this purpose, that they who are called may be numbered in the name of
   the church. (Acts ii. 41.) Wherefore we exclude from the church,
   unbelievers, apostates, hypocrites, and those heretics who do not hold
   Christ as the head. (Ephes. i. 22.) We make a distinction between those
   who have not been baptized with the external baptism of water, those
   who have been excommunicated by the sentence of the church, and
   schismatics; and according to the varying distinction in each case, we
   affirm either that they belong to the church, or that they do not
   belong to her.

   XII. As the form of the church is of the genus of relatives, we place
   it as relatively necessary, and in reality in the relation of
   disquiparancy, as we are enjoined to do by the relative names by which
   the church is called. For she is called "the body," (Ephes. i. 23,)
   "the bride" (John iii. 29,) "the city of the kingdom," (Heb. i. 8,) and
   "the house" (1 Tim. iii. 15,) in relation to "the Head," (Ephes. i. 22;
   Col. i. 18,) to "the Bridegroom" to "the King," and "the Master," or
   the Father of the family. But the relation between these things which
   are thus relatively placed, consists of three points or degrees, union,
   appointment and communication. (1.) The form therefore of the church in
   union is with her Head, Husband, King and Master of the house or
   family; which is formed by his Spirit, and by the faith of the church.
   (Gal. ii. 30; Rom. viii. 9-11.) (2.) In her subordination under her
   Head, Husband and King, which is required by the perfection and virtue
   of her Head, and by the necessity and usefulness of the church herself.
   (Ephes. v. 23.) (3.) In the influence of life, sensation and motion,
   which influence benevolently proceeds from the Head, and is happily
   apprehended by the church.

   XIII. The chief end of the church is the glory of Him by whose gracious
   evocation the church is what she is; the glory which He completes in
   His gracious acts towards the church, by creating, preserving,
   increasing and perfecting her. (Ephes. i. 12.) To this glory is justly
   subordinate, that which the church is commanded to ascribe to Him, and
   which she will ascribe as the perfecting of her "throughout all ages,
   world without end." (Rom. xi. 36; 1 Pet.. ii, 9; Ephes. iii, 21; v,
   20.) As the salvation of the church is the gift of her Head and King,
   it cannot be the end of his church, though it may be the end which she
   intends by her faith, and which she strives to obtain, that she may be
   blessed before God.

   XIV. But the church is herself now distinguished according to the acts
   of God towards her, so far as she perceives all or some of them. (1.)
   She that has a perception only of the act of creation and preservation,
   is said to be in the way or course, and is called militant, because she
   must still contend with sin, the flesh, the world and Satan. (Ephes.
   vi. 11, 12; Heb. xii. 1-4. (2.) But she that is made partaker besides,
   of the consummation, is said to be in her own land, and is called
   triumphant. After conquering her enemies, she rests from her labours,
   and reigns with Christ in heaven. (Rev. iii. 21; xiv, 13.) To that part
   of the church which is militant on earth, the title of Catholic or
   universal is likewise ascribed, as embracing within her pale every
   particular combatant or soldier. We place neither any church, nor
   anything belonging to her, in purgatory, for that is a real utopia, and
   of great notoriety among all men.

   XV. Hence, since the calling forth of the church is made inwardly by
   the spirit, and outwardly by the word preached (Acts xvi. 14,) and
   since those who are called answer inwardly by faith, and outwardly by
   the profession of their faith, as they who are called have an inward
   man and an outward; (2 Cor. iv. 16;) therefore, in reference to those
   who are called, the church is distinguished into the visible and the
   invisible from an external adjunct and accident. She is invisible, as
   "believing with the heart unto righteousness;" and she is visible, as
   "making confession with the mouth unto salvation." (Rom. x. 9, 10.)
   This visibility and invisibility belong neither less nor more to the
   whole catholic church than to each particular church. For that which is
   called "the catholic invisible church" does not appertain to this
   subject, because it can not come together into one place, and thus be
   exposed to view. But as more persons "are called" than "are chosen" or
   elected. (Matt. xx. 16.) And as many of the called profess with their
   mouths "that they know God, while in works they deny him;" (Tit. i.
   16;) and since of the hearts of these men, God is the sole judge, who
   alone "knoweth them that are his;" (2 Tim. ii. 19;) therefore such
   persons are judged, on account of the promise, to belong to the visible
   church, although equivocally, since they do not belong to the invisible
   church, and have none of that inward communion with the Head, which is
   the Form of the church.

   XVI. Then, since the church is collected out of "the world that lieth
   wholly in wickedness," (John xv. 19; Matt. xv. 9,) and as this office
   is frequently performed by ministers who preach another doctrine than
   that which the word of God contains; (2 Cor. xi. 15; Gal. iii. 1-3;)
   and since the church is composed of men who are exposed to deception
   and to falling--nay, of such as are actually deceived and fallen; on
   this account, the church is distinguished, with respect to the doctrine
   of faith, into "the orthodox" and "the heretical;" with respect to
   divine worship, into "the idolatrous," and that which retains the
   "right worship of God and of Christ;" and with respect to the moral
   virtues prescribed in the second table of the law into "a purer church,
   or into "one that is more impure." In all these respects, degrees are
   also to be observed, according to which one church is more heretical,
   idolatrous and impure, than another. But concerning all these things, a
   right judgment must be formed according to the Scriptures. In this
   relation, too, the word "catholic" is used respecting those churches
   which are neither oppressed with destructive heresy nor are idolatrous.

   XVII. Wherefore, that question is confused and preposterous which asks,
   "Can the Catholic church err?" when the inquiry ought rather to be,
   "Can the assembly that errs be the church?" For as faith is prior to
   the church, and as the church obtains this appellation on account of
   her believing, so the name of "the church" is taken away from any
   church so far as she errs from the faith. Yet if this question be
   pressed by any one, we say that by it nothing more is asked than this,
   "Can it happen that at any one time there can be no assemblage or
   congregation of men in the whole world who have not a right faith in
   Christ and God," To which an answer is readily made by a negation;
   because the church on earth will never totally fail, but must continue
   to be collected together without interruption to the end of the world,
   although not always from the same places and nations. (Matt. xxviii.
   20; Rev. ii. 5.) Otherwise, Christ will not have any kingdom on earth,
   and will not rule in the midst of his enemies until they be made his
   footstool. (Psalm cx. 1, 2.)

   We have hitherto treated of the church herself, let us now briefly
   consider her head.

   XVIII. The conditions of the Head of the church are, that it should
   contain within itself, in a manner the most perfect, all things
   necessary to the life and salvation of the church, that it should have
   a due proportion to the church, should be fitly united to her and
   placed in order with her, and that by its own virtue it may supply to
   her life, sensation and motion. But these conditions agree with Christ
   alone. For "in Him all fullness dwells;" (Col. i. 19;) "and of his
   fullness have all we received." (John i. 16.) Him hath the Father
   constituted "the Head over all things to the church;" and he bestows
   salvation on his body, which is the church. (Ephes. i. 22; v, 25.) By
   his spirit, the church is animated, perceives and moves. (Rom. viii.
   9-12.) Nor is this to be understood only about internal communication,
   but likewise concerning external administration; for it is He who sends
   forth his word and his Spirit, (Matt. xxviii. 19; Acts ii. 33,) who
   institutes a ministry in the church, who appoints, as presidents over
   this ministry, apostles, evangelists, pastors and teachers. (Ephes. iv.
   11, 12.) On this account, He is called "the chief Pastor or Shepherd,"
   (1 Pet. v. 4,) who assists and "works with" his ministers, "both with
   signs and wonders, and with divers miracles and gifts of the Holy
   Ghost;" (Mark xvi. 20; Acts iv. 30;) and who defends his church against
   her enemies, and procures likewise her temporal good, so far as He
   considers it to be requisite for her inward and eternal benefit.

   XIX. This name therefore, "the Head of the Church," cannot be adapted,
   according to any consideration, either to the apostle Peter or to the
   Roman pontiff. The papists, themselves, grant that it cannot be
   according to internal communication; and we prove that it cannot be
   according to external administration, in the following manner: (1.) St.
   Peter was himself constituted an apostle by Christ, after the same
   constitution as that by which Christ is said to have appointed
   apostles. (Ephes. iv. 7, 11; 1 Pet. i. 1.) Therefore, the rest of the
   apostles were not constituted by St. Peter, which appointment St. Paul
   expressly denies respecting himself, when he says that he obtained his
   apostleship "neither of men nor by man;" (Gal. i. 1.) (2.) St. Peter is
   a fellow-elder. Therefore, he is not the chief of the elders. (1 Pet.
   v. 1.) (3.) To St. Peter "was committed the gospel of the
   circumcision," as that of the uncircumcision was by equal right and
   authority committed to St. Paul. Therefore "they gave to each other the
   right hand of fellowship." (Gal. ii. 7-9.) (4.) St. Peter was
   reprehended by St. Paul, "because he did not walk uprightly, according
   to the truth of the gospel;" Therefore, he was not a suitable person to
   receive in charge the administration of the whole church. (5.) St.
   James, Cephas and John, are all placed by the apostle Paul as equal in
   degree; nay, as being accounted columns by the churches, with no
   difference among them. (6.) On the twelve foundations of the new
   Jerusalem are inscribed "the names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb,"
   each name on each foundation without the pre-eminence of any single one
   apart. (7.) St. Paul says that "in nothing was he behind the very chief
   apostles." (2 Cor. xii. 11.) Therefore, he was not inferior to St.
   Peter, who was one of them. (8.) St. Paul says that he "laboured more
   abundantly than all the rest." (1 Cor. xv. 10.) But he could not have
   spoken this with truth, if the care of managing the whole church lay
   upon St. Peter, and if he administered its concerns through St. Paul
   and other persons. The objections which the papists urge in favour of
   the primacy or pre-eminence of St. Peter, will be examined in the
   disputation itself.

   XX. Hence it follows that neither does this title of "the Head of the
   church" belong to the Roman pontiff. For whatever portion of right and
   dignity belongs to him, the papists say, it is derived from St. Peter,
   because he has succeeded to the chair and to the functions of that
   apostle. But let it be allowed for the sake of argument, though by no
   means conceded, that the primacy of administration over the whole
   church was granted to Peter; yet it does not follow from this that the
   same right has devolved on the Roman pontiff; for, before this
   inference can be deduced from such a supposition, the following
   propositions must be previously proved: (1.) That this right was not
   personal but successive. (2.) That this succession was inseparably
   connected with a certain chair; that he who succeeded to it enjoyed
   this right; and that he had in fact, by some means or other,
   irrefragibly gained possession of this chair. (3.) That St. Peter was
   bishop of Rome, and that he died in Rome while discharging the duties
   of that bishopric. (4.) That, from the period of St. Peter's death in
   the discharge of his episcopal functions at Rome, this primacy has been
   inseparably connected with the papal chair. All these things,
   therefore, they must prove by undoubted arguments, since they teach it
   to be of the necessity of salvation that every man be subject to the
   Roman pontiff.

   To that God in whom, by whom, and for whom all things subsist, be
   praise and glory forever and ever!
     __________________________________________________________________

  DISPUTATION 19

  ON THE JUSTIFICATION OF MAN BEFORE GOD

  RESPONDENT: ALARD DE VRIES

   As frequent mention is made in Scripture of Justification, and since
   this doctrine is of great importance to salvation, and is in these
   days, not a little controverted, it seems that we shall not be acting
   unprofitably if we institute a disquisition on this subject from the
   Scriptures.

   I. Since the word "justification" is deduced from justice, from this
   notion its signification will be appropriately derived. justice or
   righteousness, when properly considered, signifies rectitude or an
   agreement with right reason. (Psalm xi. 7; Ephes. vi. 14; Phil. i. 11;
   1 John iii. 7.) And it is contemplated either as a quality or as an
   act--a quality inhering in a subject, an act produced by an efficient
   cause. The word "justification" denotes an act that is occupied either
   in infusing the quality of righteousness into some person or in
   acquiring it for him, or in forming a judgment on a person and his
   acts, and in pronouncing sentence on them.

   II. If, therefore, according to its quality, justification be the
   acquisition of righteousness, it is the act of one who by repeated acts
   acquires a habit of righteousness, that is, the act of a rational
   creature. (Ephes. iv. 24.) If it be the infusion of righteousness, it
   is the act of Him who infuses the habit of righteousness into a
   rational creature, that is, the act of God either as creator or
   regenerator. (Isa. v. 23.) The justification which is occupied about a
   person and his acts, is the act of a Judge making an estimate in his
   own mind of the deed, and of the author of it, and according to that
   estimate, forming a judgment and pronouncing sentence, that is, the act
   of a man justifying the wisdom and the justice of God. (Matt. xi. 19;
   Psalm 81,) of a Prince justifying the cause of his subject, of a
   Pharisee justifying himself, (Luke xvi. 15,) of God justifying the deed
   of Phinehas, (Psalm cvi. 31,) and our Lord's justification of the
   conduct of the publican. (Luke xviii. 14.)

   III. From this necessary distinction of the words it appears that
   Bellarmine both admits an equivocation, and feigns an adversary for
   himself that is not adverse to him, when he proposes the state of the
   controversy which exists between him and us on this doctrine in these
   words: "Is the righteousness by which we are formally justified,
   inherent or imputative?" (1.) The equivocation lies in this--that the
   word "justification," when it is occupied about inherent righteousness,
   signifies the infusion of righteousness; but when it is employed
   respecting imputative righteousness, it signifies the estimate of the
   mind, the judgment, and the pronouncing of the sentence. (3.) He
   invents an adversary; because no one denies that the form by which any
   man is intrinsically righteous, and is declared to be so, is the habit
   or inherent quality of righteousness. But we deny that the word
   "justification" is received in this sense in St. Paul's disputation
   against the gentiles and the Jews, (Rom. 2, 3, 4, 5,) and against the
   false brethren, (Gal. 2, 3, 5,) or even by St. James in his epistle.
   Wherefore, we must maintain, either that the controversy between the
   papists and us, is respecting justification when received as the act of
   a judge, or that our controversy has nothing in common with that of St.
   Paul. (James 2.)

   IV. The justification, therefore, of a man before God is that by which,
   when he is placed before the tribunal of God, he is considered and
   pronounced, by God as a judge, righteous and worthy of the reward of
   righteousness; whence also the recompense of reward itself follows by
   necessity of consequence. (Rom. 2, 3; Luke xviii. 14.) But since three
   things come under consideration in this place--man who is to be judged,
   God the judge, and the law according to which judgment must be passed.
   Each of them may be variously considered, and it is also necessary,
   according to these three to vary justification itself. (1.) For man may
   be considered either as having discharged the works of righteousness
   without sin, (Rom. ii. 16,) or as a sinner. (iii, 23.) (2.) God may be
   viewed as seated on a throne of rigid and severe justice, (Psalm
   cxliii. 2,) or on a throne of grace and mercy. (Heb. iv. 16.) (3.) The
   law is either that of works, or that of faith; (Rom. iii. 27;) and
   since each of these has a natural correspondence together and mutually
   agree with each other, justification may be reduced to two opposite
   species or forms; of which the one is called that "of the law, in the
   law, or through the law, of the works of the law, of him that worketh
   and performs the law, of debt and not of grace." (Rom. 2, 3, 4, 9, 11,)
   But the other is styled that "of faith, from faith, through faith, of a
   sinner who believes, freely bestowed, of grace and not of debt, and
   without the works of the law." (Gal. 2, 3, 5.)

   V. But since the law is two-fold, of which mention is made in the
   question of justification, that is, the moral and the ceremonial, (for
   the judicial part of the law does not in this place come under
   discussion,) we must see how and in what sense justification is either
   attributed to each of them or taken away from it. (1.) Justification is
   ascribed to the MORAL LAW because the works prescribed are of and in
   themselves pleasing to God, and are righteousness itself strictly and
   rigidly taken, so that he who does them is on that very account
   righteous, without absolution or gratuitous imputation. For this reason
   justification cannot be taken away from it, unless for its
   non-performance. (1 Sam. xv. 21, 22; Amos v. 21-,3; Rom. x. 5.) Hence
   justification by the moral law may be defined: "It is that by which a
   man, having performed the duties of the moral law without
   transgression, and being placed before the tribunal of the severe
   justice of God, is accounted and declared by God to be righteous and
   worthy of the reward of eternal life, in himself, of debt, according to
   the law, and without grace, to his own salvation, and to the glory both
   of divine and human righteousness." (Rom. iv. 4; iii, 27; Ephes. ii. 8,
   9.)

   VI. (2.) But the rule of the Ceremonial law is widely different. For
   its works are neither of themselves pleasing to God, to enable them to
   come under the name of righteousness; nor have they such a
   consideration that absolution from sins committed against the moral law
   can be obtained through them, or that they can be graciously imputed
   for righteousness. (Micah vi. 6-8; Col. ii. 16, 20, 21.) For this
   reason, in the Scriptures, justification is taken away from it, not
   because it was not performed, but simply on account of the weakness of
   itself, and not of the flesh which sinned. (Acts xiii. 39; Heb. ix.
   10.) Yet its use for justification is two-fold according to its double
   reference to the moral law and the offenses committed against it, and
   to Christ and faith in Him. According to the former, it is the
   hand-writing recording debts and sins. (Col. ii. 14 -- 17.) According
   to the latter, it contains a shadow and type of Christ, and of "good
   things to come," that is, of righteousness and life. (Heb. x. 1.)
   According to the latter, it shewed Christ typically; (Gal. ii. 16;)
   according to the former, it compelled men to flee to Him, through faith
   in him. (Gal. iii. 21-24.)

   VII. And this is the cause why the Apostle Paul takes away
   justification together and at once from the whole law, though for
   different causes which it is not always necessary to enumerate. (Rom.
   iii. 20, 28; Gal. ii. 16; John v. 24; Psalm cxliii. 2; Rom. 3, 4.) But
   justification is attributed to faith, not because it is that very
   righteousness which can be opposed to the rigid and severe judgment of
   God, though it is pleasing to God; but because, through the judgment of
   mercy triumphing over justice, it obtains absolution from sins, and is
   graciously imputed for righteousness. (Acts xiii. 39.) The cause of
   this is, not only God who is both just and merciful, but also Christ by
   his obedience, offering, and intercession according to God through his
   good pleasure and command. But it may be thus defined, "it is a
   justification by which a man, who is a sinner, yet a believer, being
   placed before the throne of grace which is erected in Christ Jesus the
   Propitiation, is accounted and pronounced by God, the just and merciful
   Judge, righteous and worthy of the reward of righteousness, not in
   himself but in Christ, of grace, according to the gospel, to the praise
   of the righteousness and grace of God, and to the salvation of the
   justified person himself." (Rom. iii. 24-26; 3, 4, 5, 10, 11.)

   VIII. It belongs to these two forms of justification, when considered
   in union and in opposition. First. To be so adverse as to render it
   impossible for both of them at once to meet together in one subject.
   For he who is justified by the law, neither is capable nor requires to
   be justified by faith; (Rom. iv. 14, 15;) and it is evident that the
   man who is justified by faith could not have been justified by the law.
   (xi, 6.) Thus the law previously excludes faith by the cause, and faith
   excludes the law by the consequence of conclusion. Secondly. They
   cannot be reconciled with each other, either by an unconfused union, or
   by admixture. For they are perfect simple forms, and separated in an
   individual point, so that by the addition of a single atom, a
   transition is made from the one to the other. (Rom. iv. 4, 5; ix,
   30-32.) Thirdly. Because a man must be justified by the one or the
   other of them, otherwise he will fall from righteousness and therefore
   from life. (Rom. x. 3-6, Gal. iii. 10; James ii. 10.) Because the
   gospel is the last revelation; "for therein is the righteousness of God
   revealed from faith to faith;" and, after this, no other revelation
   must be expected. (Heb. i. 1.)

   IX. From the premises thus laid down according to the Scriptures, we
   conclude, that justification, when used for the act of a Judge, is
   either purely the imputation of righteousness through mercy from the
   throne of grace in Christ the propitiation made to a sinner, but who is
   a believer; (Rom. i. 16, 17; Gal. iii. 6, 7;) or that man is justified
   before God, of debt, according to the rigor of justice without any
   forgiveness. (Rom. 3, 4.) Because the Papists deny the latter, they
   ought to concede the former. And this is such a truth, that, how high
   soever may be the endowments of any one of the Saints in faith, hope
   and charity, and however numerous and excellent the works of faith,
   hope and charity may be which he has performed, he will receive no
   sentence of justification from God the Judge, unless He quit the
   tribunal of his severe justice and ascend the throne of grace, and from
   it pronounce a sentence of absolution in his favour, and unless the
   Lord of his mercy and pity graciously account for righteousness the
   whole of that good with which the saint appears before Him. For, woe to
   a life of the utmost innocency, if it be judged without mercy. (Psalm
   xxxii. 1, 2, 5, 6; cxliii, 2; 1 John i. 7-10; 1 Cor. iv. 4.) This is a
   confession which even the Papists seem to make when they assert, that
   the works of the Saints cannot stand before the judgment of God unless
   they be sprinkled with the blood of Christ.

   X. Hence we likewise deduce: That if the righteousness by which we are
   justified before God, the Judge, can be called formal, or that by which
   we are formally justified, (for the latter is Bellarmine's
   phraseology,) then the formal righteousness, and that by which we are
   formally justified, can on no account be called "inherent;" but that,
   according to the phrase of the Apostle, it may in an accommodated sense
   be denominated "imputed," as either being that which is righteousness
   in God's gracious account, since it does not merit this name according
   to the rigor of justice or of the law, or as being the righteousness of
   another, that is, of Christ, which is made ours by God's gracious
   imputation. Nor is there any reason why they should be so abhorrent
   from the use of this word, "imputed," since the apostle employs the
   same word eleven times in the fourth chapter of his Epistle to the
   Romans, where the seat of this point or argument lies, and since the
   efficacy to salvation of God's gracious estimation is the same, as that
   of His severe and rigid estimation would be if man had perfectly
   fulfilled the law without any transgression. (2 Cor. v. 19, 21.)

   XI. And though Bellarmine, by confounding the word "justification," by
   distinguishing faith into that which is formed and unformed, by making
   a difference between the works of the law, and those performed by
   renewed persons through the virtue of the Holy Spirit, and by not
   ascribing a reward even to these works, unless because it has been
   promised gratuitously, and promised to those who are already placed in
   a state of grace and of the adoption of sons, by which he confesses
   they have likewise a right to the heavenly inheritance, by granting
   besides, that the reward itself exceeds the worthiness of the work, and
   by bringing down to a rigid examination the whole life of the man who
   is to be judged, though by these methods Bellarmine endeavours to
   explain the sentiments of the Romish Church so as to make them appear
   in unison with those of the apostle; (or, at least that they may not
   openly clash with those of St. Paul;) yet, since the Church of Rome
   asserts, that the good works of the Saints fully satisfy the law of God
   according to the state of this life, and really merit eternal life;
   that when we suffer for sins by rendering satisfaction, we are made
   conformable to Christ Jesus who gave satisfaction for sins; and that
   the works of the Saints, prayer, fasting, alms-giving, and others, are
   satisfactory [to divine justice] for temporal punishment, indeed for
   every punishment, and, what is more, for guilt itself, and are thus
   expiatory for sins; since she declares that the sacrifice of the mass
   is a propitiation for the sins and punishments both of the living and
   the dead; and since she says that the works of some men are
   super-erogatory, and extols them so much as to affirm that they are
   useful to others for salvation; since these are the assertions of the
   Church of Rome, we declare that her doctrine stands directly opposed to
   that of the apostle.
     __________________________________________________________________

  DISPUTATION 20

  ON CHRISTIAN LIBERTY

  RESPONDENT: ENGELBERT SIBELIUS

   I. Liberty, generally, is a state according to which every one is at
   his own disposal, and not bound to another person. Bondage or slavery
   is opposed to it, according to which a man is not his own master, but
   is subject to another, either to do what he commands, to omit what he
   forbids, or to endure what he inflicts. Christian Liberty is so called
   chiefly from Christ the Author, who procured it; it has received this
   appellation also from its subjects, because it belongs to Christians,
   that is, to believers in Christ. But it pre-supposes servitude; because
   Christ was not necessary for any, except for "those who, through fear
   of death, were all their life-time subject to bondage." (Heb. ii. 15.)

   II. Christian Liberty is that state of the fullness of grace and truth
   in which believers are placed by God through Christ, and are sealed by
   the Holy Spirit. It consists partly of a deliverance from both the real
   and the economic bondage of sin and the law, and partly of adoption
   into the right of the sons of God, and of the mission of the Spirit of
   the Son into their hearts. Its end is the praise of the glorious grace
   of God in Christ, and the eternal salvation of believers.

   III. The efficient cause of Christian Liberty is God the Father, who
   offers it; (Col. i. 12, 13;) the Son, who, as Mediator, confers it;
   (John viii. 36; Gal. v. 1;) and the Holy Spirit, who inwardly seals it.
   (2 Cor. iii. 17, 18.) The internal cause is the grace of God, and his
   love for man in Christ Jesus. (Luke i. 78.) The external cause is the
   ransom, or the price of redemption, and the satisfaction, which Christ
   has paid. (Rom. v. 6-21; vii, 2, 3.) The sealing and preserving cause
   is the Holy Spirit, who is both the earnest and the witness in the
   hearts of believers. (Rom. viii. 15, 16; Ephes. i. 13, 14.) The
   instrument is two-fold. One on the part of God, who exhibits this
   liberty; the other on the part of man, who receives it. (1.) On the
   part of God, the instrument is the saving doctrine concerning the mercy
   of God in Christ, which is therefore called "the ministry of
   reconciliation." (2 Cor. v. 19.) (2.) On the part of man, it is faith
   in Christ. (John i. 12; Rom. v. 2; Gal. iii. 26.) The matter about
   which it is exercised is not only sin, and the law "which is the
   strength of sin;" but also the power or privilege of the sons of God,
   and the Spirit of Christ.

   IV. The form consists in deliverance from the spiritual bondage of sin
   and the law, both real and economical, in the donation of the right to
   be the sons of God, (Col. i. 13,) and in the sending forth of the Holy
   Spirit into the hearts of believers. (Gal. iv. 6.) Its subjects are all
   believers, who are freed from the tyranny of sin and of the law, and
   received by God on account of Christ as sons, through the grace of
   adoption. (Gal. iii. 26.) The chief end is the praise of the glorious
   grace of God; (Ephes. i. 14;) the subordinate end is the salvation of
   believers. (Rom. vi. 22.) The effects or fruits are two: The first
   serves for consolation. (Heb. vi. 18- 20.) The other, for admonition,
   that "being made free from sin, we may become the servants of
   righteousness." (Rom. vi. 18-22; 1 Pet. ii. 16.)

   V. But because this liberty is opposed to the bondage which preceded
   it, we must on this account treat in the first place about that
   bondage, that the design of this liberty may be the more easily
   rendered evident. We must know, that the first man was created free by
   God; but that, having abused his liberty, he lost it, and was made the
   slave of him to whom he yielded obedience, that is, to sin, both as it
   respects the guilt of condemnation and its dominion; which is real
   bondage and consummate misery. To this succeeded the economical
   bondage, [or that of the dispensation of Moses,] which God introduced
   by the repetition of the Moral Law, and by the imposition of the
   Ceremonial. The bondage under the Moral Law was its rigid demands, by
   which man, being reduced to despair of fulfilling it, might acknowledge
   the tyranny of sin which reigned or held dominion over him. The bondage
   under the Ceremonial Law was its testifying to condemnation; by which
   man might be convinced of guilt, and thus through both these kinds of
   bondage might flee to Christ, who could deliver him from the guilt of
   sin and from its dominion.

   VI. Let us now see how believers are delivered from this bondage by
   Christian liberty. We will restrict this consideration to the church of
   the New Testament, to which the whole of this liberty belongs, omitting
   the believers under the Old Testament. Though to these likewise
   belonged, through the promise of the blessed seed and through faith in
   Him, (Gen. iii. 15; xv, 6,) a deliverance from real bondage, the
   privilege of the sons of God, and the Spirit of adoption, which was
   intermixed with the spirit of economical bondage. (Gal. iv. 1-3.)

   VII. We circumscribe Christian liberty within four ranks or degrees.
   The First degree consists in a freedom from the guilt and condemnation
   of sin, which has been expiated by the blood of Christ, by faith in
   which we obtain remission of sins, and justification from those things
   from which we could not be absolved by the law of Moses. The Second
   degree consists in the deliverance from the dominion and tyranny of
   indwelling sin; because its power is mortified and weakened by the
   Spirit of Christ dwelling in us, that it may no longer have dominion
   over those who are under grace. (Rom. vi. 14.) But both these degrees
   of Christian Liberty have their origin in this--that sin was condemned
   in the flesh of Christ, and it therefore does not possess the power
   either to condemn or to command. (Rom. viii. 3.)

   VIII. We place the Third degree in the attempering of that rigor by
   which God demanded the observance of the Moral Law in the primeval
   state, and could afterwards have demanded it, if it had been his
   pleasure still to act towards men in the same manner. Indeed, God did
   actually demand it, but in an economical way, from the people of the
   Old Testament; of which he gave manifest indications in that terrific
   legislation on Mount Sinai. (Exod. xx. 18; Gal. iv. 24, 25.) "But we
   are come unto Mount Sion, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new
   covenant," whose "yoke is easy and his burden light;" (Isa. ii. 3;
   Micah iv. 2; Heb. xii. 18-24; Matt. xi. 30;) because Christ has broken
   the yoke of exaction, and it has been the good pleasure of God to treat
   with man according to clemency in the compact of the New Testament.

   IX. We place the Fourth degree in a freedom from the economical bondage
   of the ceremonial law, which had a fourfold respect under the Old
   Testament. (1.) For it was the seal of condemnation, and the
   hand-writing, or bond of our debt. (Gal. iii. 21; Heb. x. 3, 4.) (2.)
   It was a symbol and token, by which the Jews might be distinguished
   from all other nations till the advent of Christ. (Gen. xvii. 13. 14.)
   (3.) It was a typical shadowing forth of Christ, and a prefiguration of
   his benefits. (Heb. ix. 9, 10; x, 1.) (4.) Lastly, it resembled a
   sentinel or guard, a schoolmaster and tutor, by whom the church might
   be safely kept, in its state of infancy, under the elements of the
   world, in hopes of the promised and approaching Messiah, and might be
   led to faith in Him, and be conducted to Him, as St. Paul teaches at
   the conclusion of the third chapter of his Epistle to the Galatians,
   and at the commencement of the fourth.

   X. The First of these respects of the Ceremonial Law must have been
   removed, after the condemnation of sin was taken away, of which it was
   the seal. But we have already shewn in the seventh Thesis, that this
   condemnation has been abolished by Christ. The consequence, therefore
   is, that it has also obtained its end or purpose; as St. Paul teaches
   us in Col. ii. 14, where he says, Christ has blotted out the
   hand-writing of ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to
   us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his cross." He sprinkled
   it over with his own blood and obliterated it. For the Second also of
   these respects, a place can no longer be found, since the Gentiles,
   "who were formerly far off, have been made nigh by the blood of Christ.
   For he is our peace, who hath made both one, and hath broken down the
   middle wall of partition between us. Having abolished in his flesh the
   enmity, even the law of commandments contained in ordinances; for to
   make in himself, of twain, One New Man, so making peace," &c. (Ephes.
   ii. 13-15.) The Third respect consisted of types and shadows which
   prefigured Christ with his benefits. This can on no account continue
   after the body or substance itself has been already displayed. (Col.
   ii. 17.) And, lastly, the Fourth respect, since the advent of Christ,
   is useless. For when the heir has arrived at the age of maturity, he no
   longer requires a governor, tutor and schoolmaster, but is himself
   capable of managing his inheritance, of being his own adviser, and of
   consulting his own judgment in the things to be possessed. Thus, after
   the church has passed through the years of infancy, and has entered on
   the age of maturity in Christ, it is no longer held under the Mosaic
   worship, under the beggarly elements of this world," but is subject to
   the guidance of the Spirit of Christ. (Rom. viii. 15; Gal. iv. 4-7.)
   Grievous, therefore, is the error of the Pharisees and the Ebionites,
   in which they maintained, that the observance of the ceremonial law
   must be joined to the gospel, even by those Christians who had
   previously been Gentiles.

   XI. To this Fourth degree of Christian Liberty we add, the free use and
   exercise of things indifferent. Yet it has been the will of God, that
   this liberty should be circumscribed by two laws, that of charity and
   that of faith, (Rom. xiv. 5, 14; 13,) thus consulting his own glory and
   the salvation of his church. The law of faith prescribes that you be
   rightly instructed concerning the legitimate use of things indifferent;
   and sufficiently confirmed [or "fully persuaded in your own mind."] The
   law of charity commands you to procure the edification of your
   neighbour, whether he be a weak brother or one who is confirmed. You
   have examples in Romans 14; 1 Cor. 8; 9; x, 27-33; Acts xvi. 3. It is a
   part of the same law, that you should abide by the ceremonies which are
   received in the church, lest by an outrageous and unseasonable change
   you produce a schism in the church, or be the cause of much trouble.

   I. Those persons, therefore, err greatly who, in abstaining from this
   liberty, prefer their own private advantage and happiness to the
   edification of their neighbour.

   II. They err still more grievously who abuse this liberty to satiate
   the lusts of the flesh, (Gal. v. 13,) or by an unseasonable zeal to
   despise and offend their weak brethren. (Rom. xiv. 3, 10.)

   III. But those err the most grievously of all who either affix the
   observance of necessity to things indifferent, or suppose those things
   to be indifferent which are by no means such.

   XII. To these, perhaps not without profit, we shall add a Fifth degree
   of liberty, that is, an immunity from the judicial laws of the Jewish
   courts. On this subject we must hold, that the political laws of Moses
   contain, (1.) The political common law of nature. (2.) A particular law
   suited to the Jewish nation. The common law of nature embraces the
   universal notions of justice, equity and honesty. The particular law,
   as it was peculiar to the Jewish nation, was so far defined by certain
   determinations, according to the persons for whose benefit it was
   confirmed, according to the affairs and transactions concerning which
   it was confirmed, and the circumstances with which it was confirmed.
   Hence a judgment ought to be formed of the immutability and mutability
   of these laws. Whatever has been appointed for the general good,
   according to the universal principles of nature and the common design
   of the moral law, either by commanding or forbidding, by rewarding or
   punishing, it is immutable. Therefore, to such a thing Christian
   Liberty does not extend itself. What portion soever of the particular
   law has a particular respect, it is changeable. Christians, therefore,
   are not bound by these laws, so far as they are determined by a
   particular law after the manner of the Jewish Commonwealth, that is, of
   particular persons, actions, and of a particular end or good. But with
   regard to those portions of these laws which are of a mixed kind, we
   must distinguish in them that which is moral from that which is
   political. Whatever is moral, is binding, and remains either by common
   reason or by analogy. Whatever is political, is not binding with regard
   to particular determinations.

   Therefore, we disapprove of the ridiculous imitation adopted by
   Monetarius and Carolastadius, who obliged Christian magistrates to the
   necessity of observing the peculiar forensic laws of Moses in their
   administration of justice.

   XIII. The privilege or right of the sons of God, and the sending of the
   spirit of adoption into the hearts of believers follow this liberty
   from the bondage of sin and the law, to which is annexed peace of
   conscience. (Rom. viii. 15; Gal. iv. 5, 6.) That right consists in
   their being constituted heirs of God and joint heirs with Christ; and
   to this privilege belongs not only the blessed immortality of their
   souls, but likewise the deliverance of their bodies from vanity, and
   from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the
   children of God; which also comes under the name of adoption, and is
   called "the redemption of our bodies." (Rom. viii. 15-23.) Hence,
   likewise those who shall be "the children of the resurrection," are
   called "the children of God." (Luke xx. 36.) But the Spirit of adoption
   is sent into the hearts of the sons of God, as being the Spirit of the
   Son, that He may be the earnest, the seal, and the first-fruits of this
   inheritance; (Gal. iv. 6; 2 Cor. i. 22; Ephes. i. 14;) by which we are
   assured, that, as "our life is hidden with Christ in God, when Christ
   shall gloriously appear we shall also be manifested with him in glory."
   (Col. iii. 4.) And thus the liberty of glory, that will endure forever,
   will succeed to this liberty of grace, which we obtain in this world by
   Christ Jesus our Lord, through faith in his blood: To whom be praise
   forever!

   In the place of a conclusion it is inquired,

   I. Whether freedom from the bondage of sin, and from economical
   bondage, be effected by one and the same act, or by two acts? We affirm
   the former.

   II. Whether it is lawful to eat those things which are offered in
   sacrifice to idols? We make a distinction.

     __________________________________________________________________

  DISPUTATION 21

  ON THE ROMAN PONTIFF, AND THE PRINCIPAL TITLES WHICH ARE

  ATTRIBUTED TO HIM

  RESPONDENT: JOHN MARTINIUS

   I. For many ages past, all who have had any knowledge of the Pope of
   Rome, have held no low or moderate sentiments about him, but have
   entertained exaggerated notions about him and uttered the most lofty
   and excessive eulogies. This was required by that sublime degree of
   dignity to which he has been elevated. Yet the things which have been
   spoken concerning him are so diverse, as well as adverse, as to render
   it matter of wonder that such various and contrary judgments and
   eulogies about one and the same person, can be found among men who are
   Christians, at least so far as their own profession is concerned. For
   some persons not only adorn, but literally load him with titles the
   most honourable, when they give him the appellation of the spouse, the
   head, the foundation of the Catholic Church, the vicar of God and
   Christ on earth, the absolute lord of the whole Christian world with
   regard to spiritual things, in temporal things likewise, so far as they
   are ordained for spiritual things, and the Prince of Pastors and of
   Bishops. Others disparage him with titles quite contrary, such as, the
   adulterer and pimp of the Church, the false prophet, the destroyer and
   subverter of the Church, the enemy of God and the Antichrist, the
   wicked and perverse servant, who neither discharges the duties of a
   Bishop, nor is worthy to bear the name. Uniting ourselves with the band
   of those who bestow on the Roman Pontiff the epithets last cited, we
   assert that he is unworthy of the honourable titles which precede them,
   and that the latter disparaging epithets are attributed to Him through
   his just deserts, which we now proceed to prove in a few Theses.

   II. The Spouse and Husband of the church universal is one by a most
   particular unity, otherwise the church would be an adulteress. His
   properties are these: He has loved the church, has exposed or given
   himself for her, has purchased her for himself, with his own blood, has
   formed her of his own flesh and bones by the Spirit of regeneration,
   hath sanctified and cleansed her by his own blood and by his Spirit,
   that he might present her holy, unblamable and glorious. (Ephes. v.
   25-27; Acts xx. 28.) He has sealed her for an espoused wife to himself
   by the earnest of his Spirit, as with a nuptial ring, (2 Cor. i. 21,
   22; Rom. viii. 9, 15, 16,) and imparts to her his own blessings
   necessary and sufficient for life and salvation. (Ephes. v. 23.) To Him
   the church has respect, and asks, expects and receives all good things
   from Him alone. (Acts iv. 12; Rev. xxii. 17.) And to Him the apostles
   [and their successors] are preparing to present her as a chaste virgin
   to one husband." (2 Cor. xi. 2.) These properties belong to Christ
   alone: But the Roman Pontiff is not Christ. Therefore, he is neither
   the spouse nor the husband of the church universal. Nor can any greater
   affinity be framed between Christ and the Roman Pontiff, even when
   conducting himself in the best manner, than that which is signified by
   the word "the friend of the bridegroom," and "the brideman." (John iii.
   29.)

   III. The Head of the church is but one; otherwise the church would be a
   monster. His properties are these: He is united to the church by the
   internal bond of the Spirit and of faith (John xvii. 15-17; 1 Cor. vi.
   17, 19; Ephes. iii. 17.) The church is subject and subordinate to Him.
   (Ephes. v. 24, 25.) He perfectly contains within himself all things
   necessary for the life and salvation of the church. He inspires life,
   sensation and motion into the church by the efficacy of the Spirit.
   (Gal. ii. 20.) He is affected with the evils which afflict the whole
   church and the members in general and in particular. (Heb. iv. 15.) He
   suffers the persecutions and afflictions which are endured by the
   church, feeling them as much as if they were inflicted on his own body,
   and He relieves them. (Acts ix. 4, 5.) In his person the church is
   raised up together, and seated together in heavenly places in Him.
   (Ephes. ii. 6.) And therefore, she has her woliteuma "the
   administration of her public affairs," in heaven. (Phil. iii. 20.) All
   these properties agree with Christ only. But the Roman Pontiff is not
   Christ; and therefore, he is neither the head of the church, nor can
   any affinity be established between Christ, and the Roman Pontiff,
   which is not signified in the name of some particular member of the
   body, or of a duty belonging to some member. (Rom. xii. 4-8.) And no
   greater dignity can belong to the Pope of Rome, under Christ the head,
   than that which is comprehended under the words, an apostle, prophet,
   evangelist, teacher, pastor, bishop, [one who can exercise] the power
   [of working mirades,] the gift of healing, help and government. (1 Cor.
   xii. 4, 6-31.) All these dignities are ascribed to the members of the
   body of the church. Therefore, on account of none of them does the
   title of "head" appertain to this Pontiff.

   IV. The Foundation of the church universal is only one, because there
   is but one house of God and Christ. Its properties are these: It stands
   by its own power, and does not rest on any extrinsic foundation. (1
   Tim. iii. 15.) The whole house, consisting of two people, the Jews and
   the Gentiles, is built upon this foundation, as upon a chief
   corner-stone, and is sustained, by the power implanted in it, against
   all things which can assail it from without, whether from above or from
   below, on its sides, on the right hand and on the left; it continues
   immovable, does not totter, is not sunk or overwhelmed, and does not
   fall. (Heb. iii. 6; Ephes. ii. 20-22; Matt. xvi. 18.) This foundation
   is the immediate fulcrum or prop and firm support to all the lively
   stones that are built upon it; "they who believe on Him shall not be
   ashamed;" but it is a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense to those
   who do not believe and are disobedient; it dashes them in pieces, and
   they perish. (Isa. xxviii. 16; 1 Pet. ii. 4-6.) All these properties,
   both generally and severally, belong to Christ alone. But the Roman
   Pontiff is not Christ. Therefore, neither is he the foundation of the
   church. But the metonymy, by which the Prophets and Apostles are called
   "the foundations of the church," (Rev. xxi. 14,) and by which the
   saints are said to be "built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
   Prophets," (Ephes. ii. 20,) attributes nothing more to them, than their
   being "labourers together with God" in laying down Christ as this
   foundation, and in building up the whole house on Him. (1 Cor. iii.
   5-12.) But St. Peter was also among these; yet he excelled none of the
   other Apostles in any prerogative, but was inferior to St. Paul, not
   indeed in power, but in "the more abundant labour" of the latter in
   building up the church. (1 Cor. xv. 10.)

   V. God's Vicar-General, or Universal, is one who administers all things
   in heaven and on earth in the name, at the command, and by the
   authority of God. To this individual must necessarily appertain, (1.) A
   Power, inferior indeed, by reason of the dispensation, to his who
   appointed him, yet most closely approaching to it, and dependent on no
   other power than that of God. (John v. 22, 26, 27.) So that this power
   may, not undeservedly, be called autocratorical, possessing within
   itself absolute sovereignty, and pantocratorical, omnipotent or having
   power over all things. (John xvii. 2, 24.) (2.) The Knowledge, as well
   as the Power necessary to administer all things. It cannot be less than
   divine; for it must be extended to all things generally, and to every
   thing in particular, and this in an immediate manner if we consider the
   internal efficacy of government. (1 Cor. xv. 27; Rev. 2 and 3; Phil.
   iii. 21; Gal. ii. 20.) And this Vicar of God is only Christ, to whom
   alone these properties belong. But the Roman Pontiff is not Christ.
   Therefore, he is not God's Universal Vicar, not even in the church,
   because the same considerations, apply to her as to the whole universe.
   In the same way, the Universal Vicar of Christ will be one who pleads
   the cause of Christ, and who, with a power and wisdom purely divine
   administers all things in His name and by his authority. (John i. 6-8,
   13-15.) And this is the Spirit of Christ, his advocate, the Spirit of
   wisdom and of the power of God, who, in the name of Christ, appoints
   apostles, prophets, teachers, and bishops; who leads and governs
   believers, but who convinces and condemns unbelievers. (Acts xx. 28;
   xiii, 2; Rom. viii. 14.) The Roman Pontiff is not that Spirit, nor hath
   he received the Spirit without measure. (Rom. xii. 3.) Neither can the
   Roman Pontiff, even when his conduct is most exemplary, have any other
   delegated power under Christ, than that which is particular; because he
   is not endued with the Spirit, except "according to the measure of the
   gift of Christ." (Ephes. iv. 7.) And this is bestowed [on the pontiff]
   not with regard to Christ as a priest, (for that office does not admit
   of a vicar, or substitute,) but as he is king and prophet supreme, and
   only so far as concerns the external administration of some part of
   Christ's kingdom and people, either by doctrine or by government, the
   internal administration in the mean time remaining entirely vested in
   Christ, as does also his Spirit. (1 Cor. iii. 5-23.)

   VI. The Dominion Over Heaven And Earth, or over the whole church, (for
   these cannot be separated,) appertains by divine gift to Him alone who
   has said, "All things are delivered unto me of my Father." (Matt. xi.
   27.) "All things which the Father hath, are mine." (John xvii. 10.)
   "All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth: Go ye therefore,
   and teach all nations." (Matt. xxviii. 18.) "As thou hast given Him
   power over all flesh, that He should give eternal life to as many as
   thou hast given Him." (John xvii. 2.) "Whom God hath set at his own
   right hand in the heavens, far above all principality, and power, and
   might, and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this
   world, but also in that which is to come." (Ephes. i. 21.) Who is
   called the beginning," or the principle, "the first-born from the dead;
   that in all things He might have the preeminence." (Col. i. 18.) In
   whom the church is "complete; who is the head of all principality and
   power." (Col. ii. 10.) "On whose vesture and thigh a name is written
   KING of Kings, and LORD of Lords." (Rev. xix. 16.) Christ alone is thus
   described. But the Roman Pontiff is not Christ. The distinction of
   plenary power, with regard to spiritual, and temporals, is contrary
   both to plenitude of power and to the subordination of things spiritual
   and temporal; and has been fabricated on account of the defect of the
   capability of which the pontiff is destitute, to subject temporal
   things to himself, even among those nations over whom he has obtained
   the power in spiritual matters.

   VII. The Prince of bishops, apostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors,
   and teachers, is one. (1 Cor. xii. 4, 5, &c.) If it were otherwise,
   there would be more than a single monarch and dictator in the church,
   when only one is requisite in a monarchical state and government; but
   then Duumviri, two governors, would hold the pre-eminence. His
   properties are these: To institute, sanctify, and set apart to the work
   of the ministry, apostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors, teachers,
   and all bishops in the church. (Ephes. iv. 5, 6, 11-13.) To prescribe
   to them what they must say and do. (Matt. xxviii. 18-20.) To furnish
   them with necessary and sufficient gifts. (Rom. xii. 3; 2 Cor. iii. 5,
   6.) To be present with them, in the power of his Spirit and grace,
   while engaged in the discharge of their functions. (Matt. xxviii. 20.)
   To give efficacy to their ministrations. (Mark xvi. 20; 1 Cor. iii. 6.)
   To compel them to render an account. To make a distinction between the
   acts and omissions of each; and, according to the different mode of
   their administrations, to adjudge rewards or punishments. (1 Pet. v. 4;
   Matt. xxv. 19-30.) And these properties belong to Christ alone. But the
   Roman Pontiff is not Christ. Therefore, he is not the Prince of
   bishops; but if he have any claim to this office, even when he behaves
   himself in his best manner, he cannot be called by any other name than
   that of a bishop, pastor, or teacher, who ought to acknowledge all
   bishops as his fellow elders, without any disparity of the power which
   belongs to the essence of the office. (1 Pet. v. 1.)

   VIII. Since, therefore, the Roman Pontiff either attributes these most
   honourable titles of Christ to himself, or willingly suffers them to be
   ascribed to him; and since he evinces no horror at the blasphemy
   contained in these titles, and gives no tokens of his displeasure at
   this ascription of them; it follows, that he puts himself in the place
   of Christ, and is supremely opposed to Him. There is no excuse in the
   explanation which is given, that "the head and foundation is
   ministerial, and that he attributes all these things to himself under
   Christ, as having been elevated by the grace or favour of God and
   Christ to that dignity." For the protestation is directly contrary to
   the fact; and he is so much the more the bitter enemy of God and
   Christ, as he the more confidently boasts of being defended by the
   authority of God and Christ. Such conduct is, in fact, under the
   semblance of friendship to exercise the deepest enmity, and, under the
   disguised pretext of a minister of light and of righteousness, to
   promote the interests of the kingdom of darkness and of
   unrighteousness. On this very account, therefore, we assert that the
   disparaging epithets which we laid down in our first Thesis, most
   justly belong to him; and this we now proceed to show by descending to
   particulars.

   IX. First. The name of the Adulterer and The Pimp of the Church is his.
   (1.) He is the Adulterer of the church, both by the public and mutual
   profession of each other; because he calls the [Roman Catholic] church
   his and she neither disowns the arrogance of this title nor is afraid
   of the odium [attached to such assumption,] and he is the adulterer in
   reality. For he practices spiritual adultery with the church, and she
   in return with him. He commands the apocryphal writings to be accounted
   divine and canonical; the ancient Latin version of the Scriptures,
   [commonly called] the vulgate, to be every where received as the true
   original, and under no pretense whatever to be rejected; his own
   interpretations of the Scriptures to be embraced with the most
   undoubting faith; and unwritten traditions to be honoured with an
   affection and reverence equal to that evinced for the written word of
   God. He enacts and rescinds laws that pertain to faith and morals, and
   binds them as fetters on consciences. He promises and offers plenary
   indulgences, and the remission of all sins, through the plenitude of
   his power. "He exalteth himself above all that is worshipped," and
   offers himself as some god to be adored with religious worship. In all
   these acts the church, deceived by his artifices, complies with his
   wishes. He is, therefore, the Adulterer of the church. (2.) But he is
   also the Pimp or Pander of the church, because he acts towards her as
   the author, persuader, impelling exciter and procurer of various
   spiritual adulteries committed, or to be hereafter committed, with
   different husbands, with angels, Mary and other deceased saints, with
   images of God, of Christ, of the Holy Ghost, of the cross, of angels,
   of Mary, and of saints; with the bread in the sacrament of the Lord's
   Supper; and with other inanimate objects.

   X. To him likewise belongs the name of The False Prophet, whom the
   Scripture calls "the tail," in opposition to "the head;" (Isa. ix. 15;)
   and this, whether it be received in a general acceptation, or in a
   particular sense and restricted to a certain and determinate person.
   (1.) In its general meaning, whether it signifies him who teaches
   falsehood without arrogating to himself the name of a prophet, or him
   who falsely boasts of being a prophet, the latter of which seems to be
   the proper signification of the word. (2 Pet. ii. 1; Acts xiii. 6.)
   For, first, he partly introduced into the church many false dogmas; and
   partly those which were introduced when such a great mystery of
   iniquity was finished, he defends, maintains and propagates. Of this
   kind, the dogmas concerning the insufficiency of the scriptures without
   traditions, to prove and confirm ever necessary truth, and to confute
   all errors; that it is of the last necessity unto salvation for every
   human creature to be under subjection to the Roman pontiff; that the
   bread in the Lord's supper is transubstantiated, or changed in
   substance, into the body of Christ; that in the mass Christ is daily
   offered by the priest as a propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of the
   living and of the dead; that man is justified before God, partly by
   faith, and partly by works; that there is a purgatory, into which the
   souls of those enter who are not yet sufficiently purified, and that
   they are released from it by prayers, intercessions, watchings,
   alms-deeds, indulgences, &c. In the Second sense, this epithet is due
   to him, because he says that he is a prophet, who, on account of the
   perpetual assistance of the Holy Spirit, which is attached to that
   chair, cannot possibly err in things which pertain to faith and morals.
   (2.) But it also belongs to him in the restricted meaning of the word;
   because the Roman pontiff is "the false prophet who works miracles
   before the beast, (Rev. xix. 20,) "out of whose mouth comes out three
   unclean spirits like frogs," (xvi, 13,) and who is not improperly
   understood to be "the tail of the great red dragon, that drew the third
   part of the stars of heaven." (xii, 4.)

   XI. He is also deservedly called The Destroyer And Subverter Of The
   Church. For since the superstructure of the church "is built by the
   faith of the doctrine of the apostles and prophets, which rests on
   Jesus Christ himself, the chief Corner-stone," since it likewise
   increases more and more through the obedience of faith in the right
   worship of the Deity and in the pursuit after holiness; and since it is
   built up in the Lord, being fitly framed together into one body through
   the bond of peace and concord; (Ephes. ii. 20, 21; iv, 3; 2 Pet. ii. 5,
   6;) the Roman pontiff demonstrates himself to be, in a four-fold
   manner, the subverter of this edifice: First, by perverting the faith.
   This he effects, (1.) By adding the books of the apocrypha and
   unwritten traditions to the prophetical and apostolical scriptures.
   (2.) By joining himself, as another foundation, with Christ who is the
   only foundation. (3.) By mixing numerous false dogmas with those which
   are true. (4.) By taking away some things that are true, or corrupting
   them by false interpretations. Secondly, by adulterating the integrity
   of divine worship. This he does, (1.) By an addition to the persons who
   alone, according to God and his command, are to be objects of worship.
   (2.) By the introduction of a method which is expressly forbidden by
   God. (3.) By introducing vain, ridiculous and old wives' superstitions.
   (4.) By the institution of various peculiar societies of devotees,
   separate fraternities, and newly fabricated religious orders of
   Francis, Dominic, &c. Thirdly, by vitiating the purity or soundness of
   holiness and morals. This he accomplishes chiefly by the following
   acts: (1.) By inventing easy methods of obtaining remission of sins and
   plenary indulgences. (2.) By declaring certain precepts in the name of
   councils. (3.) By absolving many persons from the obligation of their
   duties. (4.) By binding men to [the performance of] those things, which
   no one whatever is capable of understanding or accomplishing. (5.) By
   bringing into the Christian world the worst examples of all wickedness.
   Fourthly, by breaking the bond of concord and unity. This he effects
   chiefly by these acts and artifices, (1.) When he arrogates to himself
   a power over others, which by no right belongs to him. (2.) When he
   obtrudes many false dogmas to be believed as true, and unnecessary
   things as absolutely necessary. (3.) By excommunications and senseless
   fulminations, by which he madly rages against those who have not
   deserved such treatment, and who are not subject to his diocese. (4.)
   When he excites dissensions between princes, republics and magistrates
   and their subjects; or when he foments, increases and perpetuates such
   dissensions, after they have been raised in other quarters.

   XII. It is demonstrable by the most evident arguments that the name of
   Antichrist and of The Adversary of God belongs to him. For the apostle
   ascribes the second of these epithets to him when he calls him "the man
   of sin, the son of perdition, who opposeth and exalteth himself above
   all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he, as God,
   sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself that he is God." (2
   Thess. ii. 3-8.) It was he who should arise out of the ruins of the
   Roman empire, and should occupy its vacant digaity. These expressions,
   we assert, must be understood, and can be understood, solely respecting
   the Roman pontiff. But the name of "The Antichrist" belongs to him
   pre-eminently, whether the particle anti signifies opposition, or the
   substitution of one thing for another; not indeed such a substitution
   as is lawfully and legitimately made by Him who has the power of
   placing things in subordination, but it signifies one by which any man
   is substituted, either by himself or by another person through force
   and fraud. For he is both a rival to Christ, and his adversary, when he
   boasts of himself as the spouse, the head, and the foundation of the
   church, endowed with plenitude of power; and yet he professes himself
   to be the vicegerent of Christ, and to perform his functions on earth,
   for the sake of his own private advantage, but to the manifest injury
   of the church of Christ. He has, however, considered it necessary to
   employ the name of Christ as a pretext, that under this sacred name he
   may obtain that reverence for himself among Christians, which he would
   be unable to procure if he were openly to profess himself to be either
   the Christ, or the adversary of Christ.

   XIII. Although the Roman pontiff calls himself "the servant of the
   servants of God," yet we further assert that he is by way of eminence,
   That Wicked And Perverse Servant, who, when he saw that his Lord
   delayed his coming, "began to smite his fellow-servants." (Matt. 24,
   48.) For the Roman pontiff has usurped domination and tyranny, not only
   over his fellow-servants, the bishops of the church of God, but
   likewise over emperors and kings themselves, whose authority and
   dignity he had himself previously acknowledged. To acquire this
   domination for himself, and still further to augment and establish it,
   he has employed all kinds of satanic instruments--sophistical
   hypocrisy, lies, equivocations, perfidy, perjury, violence, poison, and
   armed forces--so that he may most justly be said to have succeeded that
   formidable beast which "was like unto a leopard, a bear and a lion,"
   and by which the Roman empire was prefigured--and to have "had power to
   give life unto the image of the beast, and to cause that as many as
   would not worship the image of the beast, should be killed."

   XIV. Lastly, though from all these remarks it will readily appear that
   the Roman pontiff is unworthy of the name of apostle, prophet,
   evangelist, pastor, teacher, and of universal bishop; (1 Cor. iii. 5;
   xii, 28; Ephes. iv. 11;) yet, by this single argument, which is deduced
   from their peculiar attributes and duties, the very same satisfactory
   conclusions may be rendered evident to all who search the scriptures of
   the Old and the New Testament, and especially the epistles of St. Paul
   to Timothy and Titus. (1 Tim. 3;

   Tit. 1.) Nor will this evasion avail any thing, "that whatever a man
   does through another who is his vicar or substitute, he seems to do it
   himself;" for it is Christ alone who makes use of the vicarious aid of
   these persons as ministers; and the duties which they perform, are such
   as ought to be discharged by those who are distinguished by those
   titles. (Gal. i. 7-9.) Therefore, that rightly appertains to the Roman
   pontiff which God threatens through the prophet Zechariah, that he will
   raise up a foolish shepherd, and an idol shepherd, who shall devote no
   attention to the sheep, but who "shall eat the flesh of the fat, and
   tear their claws in pieces." (Zech. xi. 15-17.) God grant that the
   church, being delivered from the frauds and tyranny of Antichrist, may
   obtain shepherds that may feed her in truth, charity and prudence, to
   the salvation of the sheep themselves, and to the glory of the chief
   Shepherd. Amen.

   COROLLARIES

   I. It is a part of religious wisdom to separate the Court of Rome from
   the church, in which the pontiff sits.

   II. The Roman pontiff, even when conducting himself with the greatest
   propriety, must not be acknowledged by any human or positive right as
   the head of the church, or the universal bishop; and such
   acknowledgment of him has hitherto contributed, and does in its very
   nature contribute, not so much to preserve unity in the church, and to
   restrain the license of thinking, speaking and teaching differently on
   the chief articles of religion, as to take away necessary liberty, and
   that which is agreeable to the word of God, and to introduce a real
   tyranny.
     __________________________________________________________________

  DISPUTATION 22

  THE CASE OF ALL THE PROTESTANT OR REFORMED CHURCHES, WITH

  RESPECT TO THEIR ALLEGED SECESSION

  RESPONDENT: JAMES CUSINE

   We assert that the Reformed Churches have not seceded from the church
   of Rome; and that they have acted properly in refusing to hold and
   profess a communion of faith and of divine worship with her.

   I. I feel disposed to prove, in few words, for the glory of God, for
   the tranquillity of weak consciences, and for the direction of erring
   minds--that those congregations who take upon themselves the title of
   "Reformed or Protestant Churches," have not made a secession from the
   church of Rome, and that they have acted aright, that is, wisely,
   piously, justly, and moderately, in refusing to hold and profess
   communion of faith and worship with the Romish church.

   II. By the term, "the Church of Rome," we understand, not that
   congregation of men, who, confined within the walls of the city of
   Rome, profess the Christian faith, (although this is the only proper
   interpretation of that term;) not the court of Rome, which consists of
   the pope and of the cardinals united with him--not the representative
   church, assembled together in council, and having the Roman pontiff as
   president, nor the pope of Rome himself, who, under the cover of that
   title, extols and makes merchandise of his power. But by "the church of
   Rome" we understand a congregation of Christian, which was formerly
   dispersed through nearly the whole of Europe, but which is now become
   more contracted, and in which the Roman pontiff sits, either as the
   head of the church under Christ, but placed above a general council, or
   as the principal bishop inferior to a general council, the inspector
   and guardian of the whole church. This congregation professes,
   according to the canons contained in the council of Trent, that it
   believes in God and Christ, and performs acts of worship to them; and
   it approves of those canons, either because they were composed by the
   council of Trent, which could not err--or because it thinks that they
   are agreeable to the holy Scriptures and to the doctrine of the ancient
   fathers, without any regard to that council.

   III. We call "Reformed churches" those congregations professing the
   Christian faith which disavow every species of presidency whatever,
   assumed by the Roman pontiff, and profess to believe in and to perform
   acts of worship to God and Christ, according to the canons which each
   of them has comprised in its own confession or catechism; and they
   approve of such canons, therefore, only because they consider them to
   be agreeable to the Holy Scriptures, though they yield to the primitive
   church and the ancient fathers severally their proper places, but
   always in subordination to the Scriptures.

   IV. It cannot be said, that every church makes a secession, which
   separates from another, neither does the church that is in any manner
   whatever severed from another, to which it had been united; but a
   church is said to make a secession from another church to which it was
   formerly united, when it first and willingly makes a separation in that
   matter about which they were previously at unity. On this account it is
   necessary, that these four conditions concur together in the church
   which can justly be said to have made a secession. One of them is a
   prerequisite, as if necessarily precedent; the other three are
   requisites, as if natural to the secession and grounded upon it. The
   First is that it was formerly in union with the other; to which must be
   added, an explanation of the matter in which this union consists. The
   Second is, that a separation has been effected, and indeed in that
   thing about which it was formerly at unity with the other. The Third
   is, that it was the first to make the secession. And the Fourth is,
   that it voluntarily seceded. The whole of these conditions will come
   under our diligent consideration in the disputation on the present
   controversy about the dissension between the church of Rome and
   Reformed churches.

   V. But the explanation of another matter must be given, prior to the
   discussion of this question according to the circumstances now
   premised; and this is, "In what generally, do the union and the
   separation of churches consist?" So far as they are the churches of God
   and of Christ, their Union consists in the following particulars: they
   have one God and Father, one Lord Jesus Christ, one faith, (or one
   doctrine of faith,) one hope of their calling, (that is, an inheritance
   which has been promised and for which they hope,) one baptism, (Ephes.
   iv. 3-6,) one bread and wine, (1 Cor. x. 16, 17,) and have been joined
   together in one Spirit with God and Christ, by the bond of faith and
   charity. (Ephes. iv. 15; Phil. ii. 2.) That is, that by agreement of
   faith according to truth, and by concord of the will according to
   charity, they may be one among themselves. This is in no other manner,
   than as many members of the same body are one among themselves, because
   all of them have been united with their head, from which, by the bond
   of the Spirit, life, sensation and motion are derived to each; (Rom.
   xii. 4; 1 Cor. xii. 12, 13; Ephes. i. 22;) and as many children in the
   same family are one among themselves, because all of them are connected
   with their parents by the bond of consanguinity and love. (1 Cor. xiv.
   33; Rev. ii. 23.) For all particular churches, whether in amplitude
   they be greater or less, are large or small members of that great body
   which is called "the Catholic church;" and in this great family, which
   is called "the house of God," they are all sisters, according to that
   passage in Solomon's Song, "We have a little sister." (viii, 8.) No
   church on earth is the mother of any other church, (Gal. iv. 26,) not
   even that church from which proceeded the teachers who founded other
   churches. (Acts viii. 1, 4; xiii, 1, 2.) For no church on earth is the
   whole body, that is united to Christ the Head. (Heb. xii. 22, 23.)

   VI. From this description of union among churches, and by an
   explanation made through similar things according to the Scriptures, it
   is evident, that, for the purpose of binding churches together, the
   intervention of two means is necessary. The First is, the bond itself
   by which they are united. The Second is, God and Christ, with whom
   being immediately united, they are mediately further united with each
   other. For the first and immediate relation is between each particular
   church and Christ. The second and mediate is between a particular
   church and another of its own kindred. (1 Cor. xii. 12, 13; Ephes. iv.
   3; Rom. xii. 5; John xvii. 21; Ephes. ii. 11 13; iv, 16.) From these a
   two-fold order may be laid down, according to which this conjunction
   may be considered. (1.) One is, if it take its commencement from
   Christ, and if that bond intervene, which, issuing from Him, proceeds
   to every church and [adunat, makes it one,] unites it with Him. Where
   (i.) Christ must be constituted the Head and the very center of union.
   (ii.) The Spirit, which, issuing from Christ, proceeds hither and
   thither. (Ephes. ii. 18; v, 23; Rom. viii. 9.) (iii.) The church of
   Corinth, at Rome, at Philippi, &c., each of which is united to Christ,
   by the Spirit that goes forth from Him and proceeds towards the
   churches, and that abides in them. (1 John iii. 24; iv, 13.) (2.) The
   other order is, if it take its commencement from the churches, and if
   that bond intervene which, issuing from them, proceeds to Christ, and
   binds them to Him. Where (i.) must be placed the churches of Corinth,
   of Rome, of Philippi, &c. (ii.) Then may be laid down the faith
   proceeding from each of them. (iii.) Christ, to whom the faith of all
   these churches tends and connects each of them with Him. (1 John ii.
   24; Ephes. iii. 17.) Because the bond of charity is mutual, it proceeds
   from Christ to each church, and from every church to Christ. (Ephes. v.
   25.) It does not, however, remain there, but goes on to each kindred
   church; yet so that every church loves her sister church in Christ and
   for his sake, otherwise it is a confederacy without Christ, or rather
   against Christ. (1 Cor. xvi. 1, 2, 19.)

   VII. From the relation of this union, must be estimated the Separation
   which is opposed to it, and which cannot be made or explained except by
   an analysis and resolution of their uniting together. Every particular
   church therefore must be separated from God and Christ before it can be
   separated from the church which is allied to it and of the same body;
   (Ephes. ii. 10, 19-22;) and the bond of faith and charity must be
   broken before any church can be separated from God and Christ, and thus
   from any other church. (Rom. xi. 17-24.) But since the Spirit of
   Christ, the faith by which we believe, and charity, are invisible
   things which belong to the very inward union and communion of Christ
   and the churches, it is impossible for men to form any estimate or
   judgment from them, respecting the union or separation of churches. On
   this account it is necessary, that certain external things, which are
   objects of the senses, and which by a certain analogy answer to those
   inward things, should be placed before men, that we may be able to form
   a judgment concerning the union of the churches with Christ and among
   each other, and about their opposite separation. Those external things
   are the word, and the visible signs annexed to the word, by which
   Christ has communication with his church; the profession of faith and
   of worship, and the exercise of charity by outward works, by which each
   church testifies its individual union and communion with Christ and
   with any other church. (Isa. xxx. 21; Rom. x. 15, 17, 10, 13; John
   xiii. 35.) To this is opposed its separation, consisting in this, that
   Christ "removes its candlestick out of his place," and the churches
   vary among themselves in the profession of the faith, omit the
   requisite duties of charity, and evince and practice hatred towards
   each other. (Rev.s ii, 5; 2 Chron. xiii. 8, 2, 10.)

   VIII. But the churches of God and Christ, even those which were
   instituted by prophets and apostles, may decline by degrees, and
   sometimes do decline, from the truth of the faith, from the integrity
   of divine worship, and from their first love, (2 Cor. xi. 3; Gal. i. 6;
   Rev. ii. 4,) either by adding to the doctrines of faith, to that which
   is the object of worship, and to the modes and rites with which it is
   worshipped; or by taking away or by perverting the right meaning of
   faith, by not considering in a lawful manner that which is worshipped,
   and by changing the legitimate mode of worship into another form; and
   yet they are still acknowledged, by God and Christ, as God's churches
   and people, even at the very time when they worship Jehovah in calves,
   when they pay divine honours both to Jehovah and to Baal, when they
   offer to Moloch through the fire the children whom they had borne and
   reared for Jehovah, (Jer. ii. 11-13; 2 Kings xvi. 3; 1 Kings xviii, 21;
   Ezek. xvi. 20,) and when they suffer legal ceremonies to be appended to
   the faith of Christ, and the resurrection to be called in question:
   (Gal. iii. 1-3; 6; 1 Cor. xv, ) even under these circumstances they are
   acknowledged as the churches and the people of God, according to
   external communion by the word and the sacramental signs or tokens,
   because God does not yet remove the candlestick out of its place, or
   send them a bill of divorcement. (Rev. ii. 5; Isa. i. 1.) Hence it
   arises that the Union between such churches, as have something still
   left of God and Christ and something of the spirit of lies and
   idolatry, is two-fold: the One, in regard to those things which they
   have yet remaining from the first institution which was made by the
   prophets and apostles: the Other, with respect to those things which
   have been afterwards introduced by false teachers and false prophets,
   and especially by that notorious false prophet, "the man of sin, the
   son of perdition." For though "their word eats as doth a canker," (2
   Tim. ii. 17,) yet the goodness and grace of God have prevented it from
   consuming the whole pure doctrine of the Christian faith. On the other
   side, its corresponding Separation is as fully opposed to this last
   mentioned union, as the former union is opposed to its separation. When
   therefore the discourse turns on the separation of churches, we ought
   diligently to consider what thing it is about which the separation has
   been made.

   IX. These things having been thus affirmatively premised, let us now
   come to the hypothesis of our question, according to the conditions
   which we said must necessarily be ascribed to the church that may
   justly be said to have made a secession from another. With regard to
   the First, which we have said was required as necessarily precedent, we
   own, that the churches which are now distinguished by the title of
   "there formed," were, prior to that reformation, one with the church of
   Rome, and had with her communion of faith and of worship, and of the
   offices of charity; nay, that they constituted a part of that church,
   as she has been defined in the second thesis of this disputation. But
   we distinctly and expressly add two particulars. (1.) That this union
   and communion is as that between equals, collaterals, sisters and
   members; (Sol. Song viii. 8; 1 Cor. xii. 12, 13, 17;) and not as the
   union which subsists between inferiors and a superior, between sons and
   their mother, between members and their head: that is, as they speak in
   the schools of philosophy, the relation between them was that of
   equiparancy, in which one of the things related is not more the
   foundation than the other, and therefore the obligation on both sides
   is equal; yet the Roman pontiff, seated in the chair which he calls
   apostolical, and which he says is at Rome, affirms the church of Rome
   to be the mother and head of the rest of the churches. (2.) That this
   union and communion is partly according to those things which belong to
   God and Christ, and partly according to those things which appertain to
   the defection or "falling away" predicted by the apostle as about to
   come: for "the son of perdition" is said to be "sitting in the temple
   of God." (2 Thess. ii. 2-4.) As far therefore as the doctrine of the
   true faith sounded in these churches, and as far as God and Christ were
   worshipped, and the offices of charity were legitimately exercised, so
   far were they One Church of Christ, who patiently bore with them and
   invited them to repentance. (Rev. ii. 20, 21.) But as far as the faith
   has been interpolated with various additions and distorted
   interpretations, and as far as the divine worship has been depraved by
   different idolatries and superstitions, and the tokens of benevolence
   have been exhibited in partaking of the parts offered to idols, so far
   has the union been according to the spirit of defection and the
   communion of iniquity. (Rev. ii. 14, 20.)

   X. With regard to what belongs to the separation of the reformed
   churches from that of Rome, we must discuss it in two ways; because, as
   we have already seen, (Thesis 8,) the separation of churches is usually
   made both with respect to faith and worship, and with respect to
   charity. These separations are considered to be thus far distinguished,
   by the churches themselves; so that the church which is separated in
   reference to faith and worship, is called heretical and idolatrous; and
   that which is separated in reference to charity, is called
   schismatical. The first part of the question therefore will be this:
   "Have the churches which are now called the reformed, made a secession
   with regard to faith and worship?" Respect being had to the Second
   condition, (Thesis 4,) we reply, we confess that a secession has been
   made with regard to faith and worship. For the fact itself testifies,
   that they differ [from the church of Rome] in many doctrines relating
   to faith, and that they differ in divine worship. But the reformed
   deny, that they differ from the Romish church according to those
   articles of faith which she yet holds through apostolical tradition, or
   according to [that part of] worship which, being divinely prescribed,
   the church of Rome yet uses. Of this, proof is afforded in the
   following brief manner. (1.) For in addition to her laying down the
   word of God as the only rule of the truth, she professes to approve, in
   the true and correct sense, of the articles of belief contained in the
   apostles' creed, as those articles have been explained by the first
   four general councils; she likewise professes to esteem as certain and
   ratified those things which the ancient church decreed against
   Pelagius. (2.) Because she worships God and Christ in spirit and truth,
   by that method, and with those rites, which have been prescribed in the
   word of God. She, therefore, confesses that the separation has been
   made in those things which the church of Rome holds, not as she is the
   church of Christ, but as she is the Romish and popish church; but that
   the union remains in those things of Christ which she still retains.

   XI. With regard to the Third condition, (Thesis 4,) the reformed
   churches deny, that they were the first to make the secession. That
   this may be properly understood, since a separation consists in a
   variation of faith and worship, they say that the commencement of such
   variation may be dated from two periods. (1.) Either from the time
   nearest to the apostles, nay at a period which came within the age of
   the apostles, when the mystery anomiav, that is. of iniquity, or
   rather, (if leave may be granted to invent a word still more
   significant,) when "the mystery of lawlessness began to work," which
   mystery was subsequently revealed, and which lawlessness was afterwards
   openly produced by "that man of sin, the son of perdition," who is on
   this very account called "that wicked," or "that lawless one," and is
   said to be "revealed." (2 Thess. ii. 3-8.) The reformed say, that the
   personage thus described is the Roman pontiff. (2.) Or the commencement
   of this variation may be dated from the days of Wickliffe, Huss,
   Luther, Melancthon, Zuinglius, OEcolampadius, Bucer and Calvin, when
   many congregations of men in various parts of Europe began, at first
   secretly, but afterwards openly, to recede from the Roman pontiff. The
   reformed say, that the commencement of the detection and secession must
   be dated from the former of these two periods; and they confess and
   lament, that they were themselves, in conjunction with the modern
   church of Rome, guilty of a defection from the purity of the apostolic
   and the Roman faith, which the apostle Paul commended in the ancient
   church of Rome that existed in his days. The papists say that the
   commencement of the defection and secession must be dated from the
   latter period, [the days of Huss, Luther, etc,] and affirm that they
   are not to be accounted guilty of any defection.

   XII. This is the hinge of the entire controversy. Here, therefore, we
   must make our stand. If the reformed churches place the beginning of
   the defection at the true point, then their separation from the modern
   church of Rome is not a secession from the church of Christ, but it is
   the termination and completion of a separation formerly made, and
   merely a return and conversion to the true and pure faith, and to the
   sincere worship of God--that is, a return to God and Christ, and to the
   primitive and truly apostolical church, nay to the ancient church of
   Rome itself: But, on the other hand, if the beginning of the defection
   be correctly placed by the papists, then the reformed churches have
   really made a secession from the Romish church, and indeed from that
   church which still continues in the purity of the Christian religion.
   But the difference consists principally in this, that the Romish church
   is said to have added falsehoods to the truth, and the reformed
   churches are said, by the opposite party, to have detracted from the
   truth: this controversy, therefore, is of such a nature, that the
   burden of proof lies with the church of Rome as affirming, that those
   things of her own which she has added are true. Yet the reformed
   churches will not decline the province of proof, if the Romish church
   will permit the matter to be discussed and decided from the pure
   Scriptures alone. Because the church of Rome does not consent to this,
   but produces another unwritten word of God, she thus again imposes on
   herself the necessity of proving, not only that there is some unwritten
   word of God, but also that what she produces is the real word of God.

   XIII. Lastly, the reformed churches say, what is contained in the
   fourth condition, (Thesis 4,) that they did not secede voluntarily,
   that is, they did not secede at their own instigation, motion, or
   choice, but with lingering sorrow and regret; and they ascribe the
   cause [of this secession] to God, and throw the blame of it upon the
   church of Rome herself, or first on the court of Rome and the pontiff,
   and then on the Romish church so far as she listens to the pontiff and
   the court of Rome, and is ready to perform any services for them. 1.
   They attribute the cause of this secession to God; because he has
   commanded his people to depart out of Babylon, the mother of
   fornications, and to keep themselves from idols. (Rev. xviii. 4; 1 John
   v. 21.) 2. They throw the blame of it on the Court or Church of Rome,
   which in three ways drove away the protestant churches from her
   communion. (1.) By her mixture of deadly poison in the cup of religion,
   (Rev. xvii. 4,) from which she administered those dogmas that relate to
   faith and to the worship of God. This mixture was accompanied by a
   double command. The first, a prohibitive command, that no person should
   draw any of the waters of the saviour from the pure fountains of
   Israel; the second, a preceptive, that all men should drink out of this
   her cup of abominations. (Rev. xiii. 15-17.) (2.) By excommunication
   and anathemas; by the former she excluded from her communion as many
   persons as refused to drink the deadly poison out of the cup which she
   had filled with this mixture. By the latter, she devoted them to all
   kinds of curses and execrations, and exposed them for plunder and
   destruction to the madening fury of her own satellites. (3.) Not only
   by instituting tyranny and various persecutions, but also by exercising
   them against those who were unwilling to defile their consciences by
   that shameful abomination. (Rev. xvii. 6.) But with what lingering
   sorrow and regret they have departed, or, rather, have suffered
   themselves to be driven away, they say, they have declared by three
   most manifest tokens: (1.) By serious admonitions proposed both
   verbally and in writing, in which they have shewn the necessity of the
   reformation, and the method and means of it to be a free ecclesiastical
   council. (2.) By prayers and supplications, which they have employed in
   earnest intreaties for such an assembly, for this purpose at
   least--that a serious and general inquiry should be made, whether some
   kind of abuses and of corruption had not crept into the church, and
   whether they might not be corrected wherever they were discovered. (3.)
   By the continued patience with which they have endured every
   description of tyranny, that has been exercised against them. After all
   this, the only result has been that the existing corruptions and abuses
   are confirmed and fully established by the plenary authority of the
   pope and of the court of Rome.

   XIV. We have hitherto discussed this separation in reference to faith
   and worship. (Thesis 10.) But the reformed churches say, that they have
   by no means made a separation from the church of Rome in reference to
   charity. They invoke Christ as a witness in their consciences to the
   truth of this their declaration, and they think they have hitherto
   given sufficient proofs of it. (1.) By the exposition of their doctrine
   to the whole world, both verbally and by their writings, which disclose
   from the word of God the errors of the Romish church, and solicitously
   invite to conversion, the people who remain in error. (2.) By the
   prayers and groans with which they do not cease to importune the divine
   Majesty to deliver his miserable people from the deception and tyranny
   of Antichrist, and firmly to subject them to his Son, Jesus Christ.
   (3.) By the friendly and mild behaviour which they use towards the
   adherents of the popish religion, even in many of those places in which
   they have, themselves, the supremacy, while they neither employ force
   against their consciences, nor drive them by menaces to the profession
   of another faith or to the exercise of a different worship, but permit
   them, privately, at least, to offer that fealty and worship to God of
   which they mentally approve. Protestants use only the spiritual sword,
   that, after all heresy and idolatry have been destroyed, men, being
   saved, even in this life, with regard to their bodies, may be eternally
   saved to the day of the Lord. The prevention of the public assemblies
   of the Roman Catholics, and the compelling of them by pecuniary mulct
   or fines to hear the sermons of the reformed, may be managed in such a
   manner as will enable the latter to prove these to be offices of true
   charity. The reformed also say, that those things of which the papists
   complain, as being perpetrated with too much severity, and even with
   cruelty, against themselves and their children, were brought upon them
   either through the tumultuous and licentious conduct of the military,
   of which deeds they have themselves most commonly been the authors,
   partly by their demerits, and partly by their previous example; or they
   were brought upon them on account of crimes which they committed
   against the state or commonwealth, and not on account of religion. We
   conclude, therefore, that neither with respect to faith and worship,
   nor with respect to charity, have the reformed churches made a
   secession from that of Rome, so far as the Romish church retains any
   thing which is Christ's; but they rejoice and glory in the separation,
   so far as she is averse from Christ.

   XV. The second part of our proposition remains now to be considered,
   which stands thus: "The reformed churches have acted properly in
   refusing to hold and profess a communion of faith and of divine worship
   with the church of Rome." This may indeed be generally collected from
   the preceding arguments; but it must be here more specially deduced,
   that it may evidently appear in what things the corruption of faith and
   of divine worship principally consists in the church of Rome, according
   to the judgment of the reformed churches. The causes of this their
   refusal are three. (1.) The various heresies. (2.) The multifarious
   idolatry, and (3.) The immense tyranny, which has been approved and
   exercised by the church of Rome.

   First. We will treat of heresies, but with much brevity; because it
   would be a work of too much prolixity to enumerate all. The first, and
   one which does not dash with any single article, but which is directly
   opposed to the very principle of faith, is this, in which it is
   maintained, "That there is another word of God beside that which is
   recorded in the canonical books of the Old and New Testaments, and is
   of the same force and necessity with it, for the establishment of truth
   and the refutation of error." To this is added "that the word of God
   must be understood according to the sense of our holy mother, the
   church," that is, of the church of Rome. But this sense is that which
   the Romish church has explained, and will hereafter explain, by her old
   Vulgate Latin translation, by her confessions, catechisms and canons,
   in a way the best accommodated, for the time being, to the existing
   necessity or prevailing opinion. This is the first foundation of the
   kingdom of Antichrist, directly opposed to the first foundation of the
   kingdom of Christ, which is the immovable truth and perfection of the
   doctrine comprised, first, in the prophetical writings, and then, in
   those of the apostles.

   XVI. To this we next add another heresy, which is also adverse to the
   principle of faith. By it the Roman pontiff is constituted the prince,
   the head, the husband, the universal bishop and shepherd of the whole
   church on earth--a personage who possesses, in the cabinet of his
   breast, all the knowledge of truth; and who has the perpetual
   assistance of the Holy Spirit, so that he cannot err in prescribing
   those things which concern faith and divine worship--that "spiritual
   man who judgeth all men and all things, yet he himself is judged of no
   man," (1 Cor. ii. 15,) to whom all the faithful in Christ must, from
   the necessity of salvation, be subject, and to whose decrees and
   commands, no less than to those of God and Christ himself, every
   Christian must assent and yield obedience, with simple faith and blind
   submission. This is the second foundation of the kingdom of Antichrist,
   directly opposed to the second foundation of the kingdom of Christ,
   which God laid down when he constituted Christ his Son, the King, the
   Husband, the Head, the Chief Shepherd, and the sole Master of his
   church.

   XVII. Particular heresies, and such as contravene some article of
   faith, have reference either to the grace of God which has been
   bestowed upon us in Christ, or to our duty to God and Christ. Those
   which relate to Grace are opposed either to Christ himself and his
   offices, to the benefits, or to the sealing tokens of grace. (1.) To
   Christ himself are opposed the transubstantiation of bread and wine
   into his body and blood, with which is connected the presence of the
   same person in many places. (2.) To the Priestly office of Christ with
   respect to his Oblation, is opposed, in the first place, the sacrifice
   of the mass, which is erected on the same dogma of transubstantiation,
   and in which lies an accumulation of heresies, (i.) That the body and
   blood of our Lord are said to be there offered for a sacrifice, (ii.)
   To be truly and properly propitiatory, (iii.) And yet to be bloodless,
   for the sins, punishments, and satisfactions not only of the living,
   but likewise of the dead. United with this, or standing as a foundation
   to it, are a purgatory, and whatever is dependent upon it, (iv.) In the
   sacrifice of the mass, the body and blood of our Lord are also said to
   be daily offered, ten, or a hundred, or a thousand times, (v.) By a
   priest, himself a sinful man, (vi.) Who by his prayers procures for it,
   from God, the grace of acceptance. Heresies are likewise opposed to the
   priestly office of Christ with respect to his Intercession, when Mary,
   angels, and deceased saints are constituted mediators and intercessors,
   who can obtain something important, not only by their prayers, but also
   by their merits. The Roman Catholics sin against the kingly office of
   Christ, when they believe these intercessors of theirs to be the
   dispensers and donors of blessings. (3.) Those heresies relating to
   Grace oppose themselves to the benefits of justification and
   sanctification. (i.) To justification, when it is attributed at once to
   both faith and works. The following have the same tendency: "The good
   works of saints fully satisfy the law of God for the circumstances of
   the present life, truly merit life eternal, are a real satisfaction for
   temporal punishment, for every penalty, for guilt itself, and are an
   expiation for sins and offenses. Nay, the good works of some saints are
   so far supererogatory, as, when they perform more than they are bound
   to do, those [extra] good works are meritorious for the salvation of
   others. Lastly, when men by suffering render satisfaction for sins,
   they are made conformable to Christ Jesus, who satisfied for sins."
   (ii.) They are opposed to sanctification, when they attribute to the
   natural man without the grace of God, preparatory works, which are
   grateful to God, and through congruity are meritorious of greater
   gifts. (4.) They are opposed to the signs or tokens of grace in several
   ways: by multiplying them, by contaminating baptism with various
   additions, by mutilating the Lord's supper of its second part, [the
   cup,] and by changing it into a private mass. Those heresies which
   infringe upon our Duty to God and Christ as they principally relate to
   divine worship, and have idolatry united with them, may be
   appropriately referred to the second cause of the refusal of the
   reformed churches. (Thesis. 15.)

   XVIII. The Second Cause, we have said, is the multifarious idolatry
   which flourishes in the church of Rome--both that of the first kind
   against the first command, when that which ought not to be worshipped
   is made the object of worship, adoration, and invocation; and that of
   the second kind against the second command, when the object of worship
   is worshipped in an image, whether that object ought or ought not to be
   worshipped. (1.) The church of Rome commits idolatry of The First, with
   things animate and inanimate. (i.) With animate things--with angels,
   the virgin Mary, and departed saints; by founding churches to them; by
   erecting altars; by instituting certain religious services and rites of
   worship, and appointing societies of men and women by whom they may be
   performed, and the festival days on which they may be observed; by
   invoking them in their necessities; by offering to them gifts and
   sacrifices; by making them preside [as tutelary beings] over provinces,
   cities, villages, streets, and houses, also over the dispensing of
   certain gifts, the healing of diseases, and the removal as well as the
   infliction of evils; and, lastly, by swearing by their name. She also
   commits idolatry with the Roman pontiff himself; by ascribing to him
   those titles, powers, and acts which belong to Christ alone; and by
   asking of him those things which belong to Christ and his Spirit. (ii.)
   With inanimate things--with the cross and the bread of our Lord, and
   with the relics of saints, whether such relics be real, or false and
   fictitious. (2.) Idolatry of The Second Kind is when the papists
   worship God, Christ, angels, the virgin Mary and the rest of the saints
   in an image; and when they pay to such images honour and worship by
   adorning them with fine garments, gold, silver and jewels; by assigning
   them more elevated situations in churches and placing them upon the
   altars; by parading them on their shoulders through the streets; by
   uncovering their heads to them; by kissing them; by kneeling to them,
   and lastly, by invoking them, or at least by addressing invocations to
   them, as the power or deity who is there more immediately present. We
   assert that the distinction of worship into latria, supreme religious
   adoration, and douleia inferior worship, and uperdouleia an
   intermediate adoration between LATRIA and DULIA--of power, into that
   which is superior, and that which is subordinate, or ministerial--of
   the representation of any thing, into that by which any thing is
   performed to some kind of an image and a carved shape as unto God and
   Christ, and that by which it is performed to an image but not as unto
   God and Christ. These distinctions, and the dogma of
   transubstantiation, we assert to be mere figments, which are either not
   understood by the greatest portion of the worshipers, or about which
   they do not think when they are in the act of worship; and to contain
   protestations which are directly contrary to facts. This second cause
   is, of itself, quite sufficient to prove our thesis.

   XIX. The Third Cause is the tyranny which the church of Rome has
   usurped and exercised against those who could not conscientiously
   assent to these heresies and approve these idolatries; and which that
   church will continue to exercise so long as she listens to the Roman
   pontiff and his court. The reformed churches very properly refuse to
   profess communion of faith and worship with that of Rome, because they
   are afraid to involve or entangle themselves in the guilt of such great
   wickedness, lest they should bring down upon their heads the blood of
   so many thousands of the saints and of the faithful martyrs of Christ,
   who have borne testimony to the word of the Lord, "and have washed
   their robes in the blood of the Lamb." (Rev. vii. 14.) For, beside the
   fact that such a profession would convey a sufficiently open
   approbation of that persecution, (especially if they did not previously
   deliver a protestation against it, which, however, the Roman pontiff
   would never admit,) even the papistical doctrine itself, with the
   assent of the people, establishes the punishment, by the secular arm,
   of those whom the church of Rome accounts as heretics; so that those
   who, on other points, are adherents to the doctrine of popery, if they
   are not zealous in their conduct against heretics, are slandered as men
   governed by policy, lukewarm creatures, and even receive the infamous
   name of atheists. I wish all kings, princes, and commonwealths,
   seriously to consider this, that, on this point at least, they may
   protest that they have seceded from the communion of the pontiff and of
   the court of Rome. Besides, this exercise of tyranny is, in itself,
   equal to an evident token, that the Roman pontiff is that wicked
   servant who says in his heart, "My Lord delayeth his coming," and
   begins to eat and drink, and to be drunken, and to beat his
   fellow-servants. (Luke xii. 45.)
     __________________________________________________________________

  DISPUTATION 23

  ON IDOLATRY

  RESPONDENT: JAPHET VIGERIUS

   I. It always has been, and is now, the chief design of diabolical
   perverseness, -- that even the devil himself, should be considered and
   worshipped as a deity--than which nothing can be more reproachful and
   insulting to the true God; or that all thought and mention of a Deity
   being removed, pure atheism might obtain, and, after conscience was
   taken away, men might be hurried along into every kind of flagitious
   wickedness. But since he could not effect this, on account of the
   notion of a Deity, and indeed of a good one, which is deeply impressed
   on the minds of men; and since he knew it to be the will of the true
   God that he should himself alone be considered and worshipped as God,
   without any image; (Exod. xx. 3-5; Deut. xxxii. 17; 1 Cor. x. 20;) the
   devil has been trying to persuade men to consider and worship as God
   some figment of their own brain or some kind of creature, or, at least,
   to worship the true God in an image. In former days he had great
   success in these, his attempts; and would to God that in our times they
   were utterly fruitless! We might then be emboldened to enter on this
   discussion, merely for the purpose of knowing what idolatry is, and the
   description of it which anciently prevailed among Jews and gentiles,
   without being solicitous to deliver any admonition or caution
   respecting it. But since, alas, this evil holds domination far and wide
   in Christendom itself, we will, by divine aid, briefly treat upon it in
   these theses, both for the purpose of knowing what it is, and of giving
   some cautions and dehortations against it.

   II. Commencing, therefore, with the etymology of the word, we say,
   Eidwlon an idol, generally, signifies some representation and image,
   whether it be conceived only in the mind or framed by the hands, and
   whether it be that of a thing which never had an existence, or of
   something which does exist. But, according to Scripture usage, and that
   of the sacred writers, it signifies, (1.) An image fashioned for the
   purpose of representing and honouring a deity, whether true or false.
   (2.) Every false divinity, whether it be the pure figment of the human
   brain, or any thing existing among the creatures of God, and thus real,
   according to its absolute essence, because it is something; but false
   with regard to its relative essence, because it is not a Divinity,
   which yet it is feigned to be, and for which it is accounted. (Exod.
   xx. 4; Acts vii. 41; Psalm cxv. 4-8; 1 John v. 21; 1 Cor. viii. 4; 1
   Thess. i. 9; Col. iii. 5; Deut. vi. 13; [xiii, 6;] Matt. iv. 10; Deut.
   v, 6-9.) Latreuein (idolatry) signifies, in its general acceptation "to
   render service, or worship," "to wait upon;" in Hebrew, db[ : But in
   the Scriptures, and among ecclesiastical writers, it is peculiarly
   employed about [acts of] religious worship and service; such as
   these--to render love, honour, and fear to God--to repose hope and
   confidence in him--to invoke him -- to give him thanks for benefits
   received--to obey his commands without exception--and to swear by his
   name. (Mal. i. 6; Psalm xxxvii, 3; 1, 15; Deut. vi. 13.)

   III. Idolatry, therefore, according to the etymology of the word, is
   "service rendered to an idol;" but, with regard to fact, it is when
   divine worship is paid to any other than the true God, whether that be
   done by an erroneous judgment of the mind, by which that is esteemed as
   a God which is no God, or it be done solely by the performance of such
   worship, though he who renders it be aware that the idol is not God,
   and though he protest that he does not esteem it as a God, since his
   protestation is contrary to fact. (Isa. xlii. 8; Gal. iv. 8; Exod.
   xxxii. 4, 5.) In proof of this, the belly, covetousness, and idolatry,
   are severally said to be the god of some people, and covetous men are
   called "idolaters." (Phil. iii. 19; Col. iii. 5; Ephes. v. 5.) But so
   far is that opinion or knowledge (by which he does not esteem the idol
   as a god) from acquitting him of idolatry, who adores, invokes, and
   kneels to it, that from the very circumstance of his thus invoking,
   adoring, and kneeling to an idol, he may rather be said to esteem that
   as a god, which, according to his own opinion, he does not consider to
   be a god. (1 Cor. x. 19, 20.) This is to say to the wood, with one
   portion of which he has kindled the fire of his hearth and of his oven,
   and from another has fashioned to himself a god, "Deliver me; for thou
   art my god," (Isa. xliv. 15, 17,) and to a stone, "Thou hast begotten
   me." (Jer. ii. 27.)

   IV. Idolatry is also of two kinds. The First is, when that which is not
   God is accounted and worshipped as God. (Exod. xx. 3-5.) The Second is,
   when that which is either truly or falsely accounted for God is
   fashioned into a corporeal image, and is worshipped in an image, or
   according to an image. The former of these is prohibited in the first
   commandment: "Thou shalt not have other gods," or "another god, before
   me," or "beside me." The latter, in the second command, "Thou shalt not
   make unto thyself any likeness; thou shalt not bow down thyself to
   them, nor serve them." (Exod. xx. 3-5; 1 Cor. x. 7.) From this, it
   appears, that idolatry may also be considered in another view, and in
   three different ways. The First mode is, when the true God is
   worshipped in an image. The Second is, when a false god is worshipped.
   The Third, which partakes of both, is when a false god is worshipped in
   an image. The first mode is of a more venial description than the
   second, according to that passage, "And it came to pass, as if it had
   been a light thing, for Ahab to walk in the sins of Jeroboam," who had
   worshipped Jehovah in calves, and had taught others to do the same,
   "that he went and served Baal, and bowed himself down before him." (1
   Kings xvi. 31.) The third mode is the worst of all; for it consists of
   a double falsehood, of a feigned divinity, to whom such worship does
   not belong, and of an assimilated divinity, when of The One to whom it
   is an assimilation, it is not a likeness. (Isa. xl. 19, 20; Jer. x. 14)
   Varro has observed that, by the last of these modes, all fear of God
   has been taken away, and error has been added to mortals.

   V. In the prohibition, that the children of Israel should have no God
   except Jehovah, the Scriptures employ three words to express "another
   God." The first is r j a (Exod. xx. 3) The second, d z and the third, r
   k r (Psalm lxxxi. 9.) The first signifies, generally, "any other god;"
   the second, "a strange god;, and the third, "a strange and foreign
   god." But though these words are not so opposed to each other, as not
   occasionally to coincide, and to be indiscriminately used about a god
   that is not the TRUE ONE; yet, from a collation of them as they are
   used in the Scriptures, it is easy to collect that "another god" may be
   conceived under a three-fold difference; for they were either invented
   by their first worshipers; or they were received from their ancestors,
   or they were taken from other nations. (Deut. xxxi. 16, 17.) The last
   of these occurs, (1.) Either by some necessity, of which David
   complains, when he says, "They have driven me out this day from abiding
   in the inheritance of Jehovah, saying, Go, serve other gods.(1 Sam.
   xxvi. 19.) (2.) Or by persuasion; as the heart of Solomon was inclined
   by his wives to worship other gods. (1 Kings xi. 4, 5.) (3.) Or by the
   mere choice of the will; as Amaziah took the gods of the children of
   Seir, after he had come from the slaughter of the Edomites. (2 Chron.
   xxv. 14.) In these degrees the Scriptures present to us a difference
   between a greater and a less offense. For since Jeroboam is frequently
   accused of having made Israel to sin and of increasing the crime of
   idolatry; (1 Kings xii. 30; xiv, 16;) and since the children of Israel
   are often said to have "provoked God to jealousy with strange gods,
   whom they knew not and whom their fathers did not fear," (Deut. xxxii.
   16,) it appears that the invention or fabrication of a new god is a
   more grievous crime, than the adoration of "another god" whom they
   received from their ancestry. And since it greatly contributes to the
   dishonour and reproach of Jehovah, to take the gods of foreign nations
   as objects of worship, by which, those gods plainly seem to be
   preferred to Jehovah, and the religion of those nations, to the law of
   Jehovah, this crime, therefore, is, of all others, by far the most
   grievous. (Jer. ii. 11, 13.)

   VI. In the prescription of the second command, that nothing which is
   esteemed as a god be worshipped in an image, the Scriptures most
   solicitously guard against the possibility of the human mind finding
   out any evasion or lurking place. For, with regard to the matter, they
   forbade images to be made of gold and silver, the most precious of the
   metals, and therefore, of any metal whatever, or of wood or stone.
   (Exod. xx. 23; Isa. xliv. 12 13; Jer. ii. 27.) It prohibits every form,
   whether the image represent a living creature, any thing in the
   heavens, the sun, the moon, or the stars; any thing on the earth or
   under the earth, a man, a quadruped, a flying creature, a fish or a
   serpent, or a thing that has no existence, but by the madness and
   vanity of the human brain is compounded of different shapes, such as a
   monster, the upper parts of which are human, and the lower parts those
   of an ox; or one whose upper parts are those of an ox, and the lower,
   those of a man; or one, the higher parts of which are those of a
   beautiful woman, and the lower those of a fish, terminating in a tail.
   It prohibits every mode of making them, whether they be formed by
   fusion, by sculpture, or by painting; (Jer. x. 3, 9, 14; Ezek. viii.
   10, 11;) because it says uinversally, "Thou shalt not make unto thee
   any likeness." And it adds a reason which excludes generally every kind
   of material and every method of fabrication: "For ye saw no manner of
   similitude, on the day that the Lord spake unto you in Horeb out of the
   midst of the fire. Take ye, therefore, good heed unto your souls, lest
   ye corrupt yourselves, and make you a graven image, the similitude of
   any figure," &c. (Deut. iv. 15-19.)

   VII. But with regard to the mode of worship, and to the actions
   pertaining to it, scarcely any thing can be devised or invented, and
   can be performed to idols, (that is, both to false deities themselves
   and to the images of false divinities, and to those of the true God,)
   which is not expressly said in the Scriptures to be hateful to God,
   that no one may have the least pretext for his ignorance. For the
   Scriptures take away all honour and service from them, whatever may be
   the manner in which they are performed, whether by building temples,
   high places or groves by erecting altars, and by placing images upon
   altars; or by offering sacrifices, burning incense, by eating that
   which is offered in sacrifice to idols, by bending the knees to them,
   by bestowing kisses on them, and by carrying them on their shoulders.
   (Exod. xx. 5; 1 Kings xi. 7; xii, 31-33; 2 Kings xvii. 35; Ezek. viii.
   11; Num. xxv. 2; 1 Kings xix. 18; Isa. xlv. 20; Jer. x. 5.) The
   Scriptures also prohibit men from placing hope and trust in idols,
   forbid invocation, prayers and thanksgivings to be directed to them,
   and will not suffer men to fear them and to swear by them; because
   idols are as unable to save as to inflict injury. (Psalm cxv. 8; Jer.
   v. 7.) The Scriptures do not permit men to yield obedience to idols,
   because a graven image is a teacher of lies and vanity; (Jer. ii. 5-8,
   20; xi, 8-13;) and false gods often require of their worshipers those
   things from which all nature, created and uncreated, that of God and of
   man, is most abhorrent. (Lev. xviii. 21.)

   VIII. But, because the human mind is both inclined and fitted to
   excogitate and invent excuses, nay even justifications, for sins,
   particularly for the sin of idolatry, and because the pretext of a good
   intention to honour the Deity serves the more readily as a plea for it,
   [this propensity of mind,] on account of conscience not equally
   accusing a man either for the worship which he offers to a false
   divinity, or for that which he presents to the true God in an image, as
   it does for the total omission of worship, and for a sin committed
   against the rules of equity and goodness which prevail among mankind;
   our attention will be profitably called to the consideration of what is
   the judgment of God concerning this matter, by whose judgment we must
   stand or fall. Let us take our commencement at that species by which
   the true Deity is worshipped in an image, as Jehovah was in the calf
   which Aaron fashioned, and in those which were made by Jeroboam. (Exod.
   xxxii. 4; 1 Kings xii. 28.) God has manifested this, his judgment, by
   his word and by his acts. (1.) First, by his word of declaration, God
   has shewn what are his sentiments both concerning the fabrication of an
   image and the worship offered to it. The Fabrication, he says, is "a
   changing of the glory of the incorruptible God into the similitude of
   an ox that eateth grass, into an image made like to corruptible man,
   and to birds, and to four-footed beasts, and creeping things." (Psalm
   civ. 20; Rom. i, 23.) But the Worship, he says, is offered, not to God,
   whom they wished to represent by an image, but to the calf itself, and
   to the image which they had fabricated. (1 Kings xii. 32.) For these
   are his words: "They have made them a molten calf, and have worshipped
   it, and have sacrificed thereunto." (Exod. xxxii. 8.) And St. Stephen
   says, "They made a calf in those days, and offered sacrifice unto the
   idol." (Acts vii. 41.) On this account also he calls them, "gods of
   gold and silver," "other gods and molten images." (Exod. xxxii. 31; 1
   Kings xiv. 9.) Secondly, by His word of threatening, by which he
   denounces destruction to those who worshipped the calf that Aaron
   formed, and to Jeroboam and his posterity. (Exod. xxxii. 9, 10; 1 Kings
   xiv. 10, 11.) (2.) God has also displayed his judgment about idolatry
   by his acts. He not only fulfilled this, his word of threatening, by
   cutting off Jeroboam and his posterity, (2 Chron. xiii. 15-20,) and by
   destroying many thousands of the Israelites; (Exod. xxxii. 28;) but
   likewise by chastising similar sinners by another horrible punishment,
   that of blindness, and of being delivered over to a reprobate mind."
   (Rom. i. 24-28.)

   IX. Such, then, is the judgment of God concerning that species of
   idolatry which is committed with the intention of worshipping that God
   who is truly God. Let us now see how severe this judgment is against
   that species in which the intention is to offer worship to that which
   is not the true God, to another god, to Moloch, Baal, Chemosh,
   Baal-peor, and to similar false gods, though they were esteemed as gods
   by their worshipers. (Deut. xxix. 17; xxxii, 14-17.) Of this, his
   judgment, God has afforded most convincing indications, both by his
   word and his acts. In this word of declaration two things occur, which
   are most signal indications of this. First is, that he interprets this
   act as a desertion of God, a defection from the true God, a perfidious
   dissolution of the conjugal bond by spiritual adultery with another,
   and a provoking of God himself to jealousy. The Second is, that he says
   this adultery is committed with demons and devils. For these are some
   of the strains of Moses in his very celebrated song: "They sacrificed
   unto devils, not to God; to gods whom they knew not," &c. (Deut. xxxii.
   17.) And the royal psalmist sings thus: "They sacrificed their sons and
   their daughters unto devils, unto the idols of Canaan," (Psalm civ. 37,
   38,) which they did when they compelled any of their offspring to pass
   through the fire to Moloch. (Lev. xviii. 21.) The apostle Paul agrees
   with this when he says, "The things which the gentiles sacrifice, they
   sacrifice to devils and not to God;" (1 Cor. x. 20;) whether this
   signifies, that some demon lay concealed in those images; or that those
   sacred rites were performed according to the will and prescription of
   demons, either openly, by oracles, responses, and the verses of
   prophesying poets, or secretly by the institutes or maxims of the
   world, (Arnob. lib. 6; Aug. de Civ. Del. lib. 8, 23,) that is, of
   wicked people, of whom Satan is called "the prince," and among whom he
   is said to have his throne. (1 Pet. iv. 3; 2 Cor. iv. 4; Rev. ii. 13.)
   The denunciations of punishments for this crime, and the execution of
   these threats, are described generally throughout the whole of the
   sacred Scriptures.

   X. If the things, thus explained from the Scriptures, be applied to
   Latriav, the divine adorations, and to Qrhskeiav, the religious
   ceremonies or superstitions which are employed in the popish church; it
   will clearly appear, that she is guilty of the crime of the two-fold
   idolatry which has now been described. (Thesis 4.) Of the First Kind
   she renders herself guilty, because she presents divine worship to the
   bread in the Lord's supper, to the virgin Mary, to angels and departed
   saints, to the relics of Christ's cross and of the saints, and to
   things consecrated. Of the Second Kind she renders herself guilty,
   because her members worship, in an image, God, Christ, the cross of
   Christ, the virgin Mary, angels and saints. Each of these charges shall
   be demonstrated; and, we will confirm them in as brief a manner as
   possible, after having closed up all the evasions, through which the
   worshipers of idols try to creep out when they are held fast bound.

   XI. 1. First. Concerning the sacrament of the Lord's supper, to which
   "all the faithful in Christ, according to the method always received in
   the [Roman] Catholic church, present in veneration the worship of
   latria, or supreme adoration, [which is due to the true God.] Nor is
   this most holy sacrament to be the less adored because it was
   instituted by Christ our Lord, that it might be received, as the
   Council of Trent says, (Session 13, 5,) when it frees us from one part
   of the sacrament. To this we subjoin, in the discharge of another part
   of the duty we have undertaken: But the worship of latria or supreme
   adoration, cannot be paid to the sacrament of the eucharist without
   idolatry. (1.) It cannot be paid even in the use of the eucharist,
   because bread continues to be bread still, with regard to its
   substance, and it is not transubstantiated or changed into the body of
   Christ by consecration. For the eucharist would thus cease to be a
   sacrament, of whose essence it is to consist of an external thing; and
   the body of Christ would thus begin to exist anew; for nothing can be
   changed into that which had no previous existence. (2.) Much less can
   this worship be paid to the sacrament in its abuse. Because, though a
   legitimate consecration might [be supposed to] have the power of
   transubstantiating, yet an illegitimate consecration cannot effect a
   transubstantiation. For all right of consecration depends on the divine
   institution: but a consecration to adore, and not to receive, is
   foreign to the design of the institution, and therefore inefficacious.
   (Matt. xxvi. 26;1 Corinthians x. 16; xi, 25.) Therefore, the Roman
   Catholic church commits idolatry, as she presents to the sacrament of
   the eucharist the service of latria, or supreme adoration, which is due
   to the true God alone.

   XII. Secondly. In the worship which the papists perform to the virgin
   Mary, angels and departed saints, we say they commit idolatry in two
   ways--in reference to the act of adoring them, and to that of invoking
   them. (1 Kings xix. 18; 2 Kings xvii. 11,16, 35.) (1.) In adoring them,
   when they do reverence to all and to each of them by altars, masses,
   festivals or holy days, vigils, fasts, images, candles, offerings, by
   burning incense, by vows, pilgrimages, and genuflections. All these
   acts relate to latria or supreme adoration, and to divine worship, when
   presented to the true God according to his will, or to false gods
   through the superstition of men. (2.) In invoking them, when the
   papists "betake themselves to the prayers, and to the help and
   assistance, afforded by the saints," as the Council of Trent says,
   (Session 25,) and when they return thanks to them for the benefits
   which they receive. (Lombard. lib. 4, dist. 25.) But they have this
   recourse to the Prayers of angels and saints, as their intercessors,
   mediators, patrons and advocates, who intercede. (1.) With a pious
   affection, by which they desire the wishes of those who pray to them,
   to be fulfilled. (2.) With their glorious and most holy merits, which
   are presented in favour of those who, with suppliant intreaties,
   require their prayers. They have this recourse, also, to the Help and
   Assistance of angels and saints, as to auxiliaries or helpers,
   preservers and the guardians of grace and glory; that is, the liberal
   dispensers of all blessings, their deliverers in necessities, whom they
   also denominate their life, salvation, safety, hope, defense, refuse,
   solace, yea, their only hope, and their safe fortress. But these are
   titles which belong to God and Christ alone, as the decorations of the
   highest excellence, wisdom, benevolence and power; than which nothing
   can be conceived more illustrious, as is manifest from the Scriptures,
   in which these titles are read as attributed to God and Christ; (Psalm
   xlvi. 1, 2; xviii, 1, 2; xxxvi, 7, 10; lxii, 2, 3, 6; Isa. xlv. 20;
   Acts iv. 12;) when the supreme honour of invocation and adoration is
   offered to them by holy men. And though the turpitude of this idolatry
   be exceedingly foul and disgusting, yet how immensely is it aggravated
   by rendering the reason which serves as a pretext to them for that
   deed; than which reason nothing can be imagined to be more injurious to
   God and Christ. (1.) To God, when the papists say that our heavenly
   Father has given half of his kingdom to the blessed virgin, the queen
   of heaven, whom they also denominate "the mistress of the world," "the
   star of the sea," "the haven or port of salvation," and "God;" (Gul.
   Biel. in Can. Miss. Lect. 80;) and when they say that since God has
   both justice and mercy, he retains the former of these himself, but has
   granted the exercise of mercy to his virgin mother, and therefore, that
   we must appeal from the court of the justice of God to the court of the
   mercy of his mother. (2.) To Christ, nothing can be more injurious than
   this; because the papists say that Christ is not only an advocate, but
   that he is a judge, and as such, will discuss all things, so that
   nothing will remain unpunished; and therefore, that God has provided
   for us a female advocate, who is full of mildness and suavity, and in
   whom is found nothing that is harsh or unpleasant, who is, also, on
   this account, called "the throne of Christ," on which he reposed.
   (Anton. page 4, tit. 15, cap. 14.)

   XIII. Thirdly. That the papists defile themselves with idolatry in
   paying reverence to the relics of the cross of Christ and of the
   saints, by performing unto them acts both of adoration and of
   invocation, is proved, partly from their own confession, and partly
   from the very exercise of those religious acts which they offer to
   them. (1.) The Council of Trent publishes the confession, when it says,
   (Session 25,) "Those persons are to be wholly condemned, who affirm
   that honour and veneration are not due to the relics of saints; or that
   those relics, and other sacred monuments, are unprofitably honoured by
   the faithful; and that resort is vainly made to the sepulchers of
   saints, for the purpose of obtaining their assistance." The next
   confessor on this subject is "the angelical doctor," who is believed to
   have written all things well concerning Christ. For he says, (Sum. p.
   3, Qu, 25,) that the adoration of latria, or supreme worship, must be
   given to the cross of Christ on account of the contract [into which it
   came] with the members of the body of Christ. This is a reason quite
   sufficient to Antoninus to affirm (Anton. p. 3, tit. 12, c. 5) that not
   only is the cross of Christ to be adored, but likewise all things
   belonging to it--the nails, the spear, the vestments, and even the
   sacred tabernacles. In accordance with these confessions, the Roman
   Catholic church sings, "Behold the wood of the Cross! We adore thy
   cross, O Lord." (2.) Another method the papists have of declaring their
   idolatry by various acts--when they adorn the relics of the cross of
   Christ and of the saints, with gold, silver, and jewels; when they wrap
   them in fine lawn napkins and in pieces of silk or velvet; when they
   carry them about with great pomp, in processions instituted for the
   purpose of returning thanks and making requests; when they place them
   on altars; when they suspend before these relics gifts and curses; when
   they present them to be viewed, kissed, and adored by kneeling, and
   thus themselves adore them; when they light wax candles before them,
   burn incense to them; when they consecrate churches and altars by their
   presence, and consider them as rendered holy; when they institute
   festivals to them; when they celebrate masses to their honour, under
   this idea, that masses celebrated upon an altar on which relics are
   placed, become more holy and efficacious; when they undertake
   pilgrimages to them; when they carry them about as amulets and
   preservatives; when they put them upon sick people; when they sanctify
   their own napkins or handkerchiefs, their garlands, and other things of
   the same kind, by touching them with these relics, that they may serve
   for the same purposes; because they think that grace and a divine
   virtue exist in them, which they seek to obtain from them by
   invocations, and other services performed before them; they use them
   for driving away and expelling devils and bad spirits; and they do all
   these things which the heathen did to the relics of their idolatry. To
   all these particulars, must be added that most shameful illusion--the
   multiplication of relics, and the substitution of such as belong to
   other persons than to those whose names they bear. Hence, the origin of
   that witty saving, "The bodies of many persons are honoured on earth,
   whose souls are burning in everlasting torments." (Cal. de relig.)

   XIV. The Fourth specimen, partly of the same idolatry, and partly of a
   superstition much worse than that of the heathens, the papists afford
   not only in the dedications and consecrations of churches, alters,
   vases, and ornaments which belong to them, such as the cross, the
   chalice and its covers, linen clothes, the vestments of priests, and of
   censers; also in the consecration of easter wax candles, holy water,
   salt, oil for extreme unction, bells, small waxen figures like dolls,
   each of which they call "Agnus Dei," and of cemeteries or burial
   grounds, and things of a similar kind, but likewise in the use of
   things thus consecrated, for the papists pray in these consecrations,
   that God would furnish or inspire the things now enumerated, with
   grace, virtue and power to drive away and expel bodily and spiritual
   evils, and to bestow the contrary blessings; they use them as actually
   possessed of such grace and virtue; and perform to them religious
   worship. We will here produce the following few instances of this
   matter: They have ascribed remission of Sins to visitations of churches
   thus consecrated. They use the following words, among others, in their
   formularies of consecrations, on the cross to be consecrated: "Deign, O
   Lord, to bless this wood of the cross, that it may be a saving remedy
   to mankind, that it may be the solidity of faith, the advancement of
   good works, the redemption of souls, and a safeguard against the fierce
   darts of enemies." In the formularies on holy water, these words occur:
   "I exorcise or adjure thee, O creature of water, that thou become
   exorcised water to put to flight all the power of the enemy, to root
   him out, and to displant friendly greetings with his apostate angels,"
   &c. This is part of the formulary in the consecration of salt: "I
   exorcise or adjure thee, O creature of salt, that thou be made
   exorcised salt for the salvation of believers, that thou mayest be
   healthful soundness of soul and body to those who receive thee," &c.
   Also, the following words: "Deign, O Lord, to bless and sanctity this
   creature of salt, that it may be, to all who take it, health of mind
   and body; and that what thing soever shall be sprinkled with it, may be
   devoid of all filth or uncleanliness, and of every attack of spiritual
   wickedness." But they attribute to the consecrated small wax figures,
   which they call "Agni Dei," the virtue of breaking and removing every
   sin, as the blood of Christ does; and, according to this opinion, they
   use the same things, reposing their hope and confidence in them, as if
   they were actually endued with any such power.

   XV. But that the papists commit the second species of idolatry in the
   worshipping of images, (Theses 4, 6, & 10,) is abundantly proved from
   their own confession, the forms of consecration, and their daily
   practice. (1.) Their own confession may be found in the canons and
   decrees of the Council of Trent, in which it is affirmed, (Session 25,)
   "The images of Christ, of the blessed virgin, and of other saints, are
   to be held and retained, especially in churches; and due honour and
   veneration are to be exhibited to them; so that by the images which we
   kiss, and before which we uncover our heads, and prostrate ourselves,
   we adore Christ, and venerate the saints whose likenesses those images
   bear; this is what was sanctioned by the second Nicene Council." Let
   the acts of that Council be inspected, and it will appear that the
   adoration and invocation which were established by it, are mere
   idolatry. To these, let Thomas, and the multitude of their divines, be
   added, who are of opinion that images must receive the same services of
   adoration, as those with which the prototypes which they represent are
   worshipped. (2.) The formularies of their consecrations make a similar
   declaration; for the image of the virgin Mary is consecrated in the
   following form: "O God, sanctify this image of the blessed virgin, that
   it may bring the help of saving aid to thy faithful people, if thunder
   and lightning prevail; that hurtful things may be the more speedily
   expelled; that inundations caused by rains, the commotions of civil
   wars, or the devastations committed by pagans, may be repressed and
   appeased at its presence. (1 Kings 8.) In the consecration of the image
   of John the Baptist, the following words occur:

   "Let this sacred image be the expeller of devils, the invoker of
   angels, the protector of the faithful, and let its intercession
   powerfully flourish in this place." (3.) In the daily practice of the
   papist, most of those acts, both of adoration and invocation, are
   performed to images, which we have already mentioned as having been
   exhibited to the saints themselves; and they usually perform those acts
   [which they think due] to the saints, to their images, or in their
   images, but seldom indeed do they by a pure [mental] glance look up to
   the saints themselves, being under the influence of this opinion--that
   the honours [which they thus pay to images] belong to the prototypes
   themselves, and therefore that the prayers which they address to them
   will by this means be the more readily and speedily heard and answered.

   XVI. The papists do not indeed deny, that they present this worship,
   these services, and acts both of adoration and invocation, to the
   sacrament of the eucharist, to the virgin Mary, to angels and departed
   saints, to relics and things consecrated, and to these images: at least
   they are unable to deny this, except by an evident untruth. Yet they
   excuse themselves under the pretense of certain exceptions and
   distinctions, which they consider to be of such value and power, as to
   exempt from idolatry those acts which are performed by themselves with
   such an intention of mind, but which, when performed by others, are
   really idolatrous. These exceptions are, First. According to the
   three-fold excellence of divine, human and intermediate, there is a
   three-fold honour. And here the distinction is produced of Latreia
   "latria" or divine worship, douleia "dulia" or human worship, and
   uperdouleia "hyperdulia" or intermediate, or between both. To this may
   be added what they say, that most of the acts which relate to this
   worship are analogous. The Second exception is from the intention of
   those who offer those religious services. The Third is in the
   difference between intercession and bestowing, that is, between the
   office of mediator as discharged by the [popish] saints, and as
   discharged by Christ Jesus. The Fourth is in the distinction between an
   image and an idol.

   XVII. The First subterfuge has three members. To the first of these we
   reply, (1.) The Scriptures do not acknowledge any excellence that is
   called "hyperdulia or intermediate," or that is different from divine
   excellence except what is according to the functions, graces and
   dignities through which some rational creatures, by divine command,
   preside over others and minister to them--men as long as they remain in
   this mortal life--and angels to the end of the world. Therefore, no
   homage paid to a creature is pure from idolatry, except that which is
   offered to superiors who live in this world, and which is approved by
   the Scriptures. (Psalm lxxxii. 1, 6; John x. 35.) (2.) That
   intermediate excellence, and the worship which is accommodated to it,
   are rejected by the Scriptures, since they condemn the "worship paid to
   angels" (Col. ii. 18,) and commend Hezekiah for having "broken in
   pieces the brazen serpent that Moses had made; for unto those days the
   children of Israel did burn incense to it." (2 Kings xviii. 4) To the
   second monster of this subterfuge we reply, the distinction of worship
   into latria and dulia is vain in this case; for the apostle claims the
   worship of dulia [which the papists call an inferior or human
   adoration] for the true God alone, when he blames the gentiles for
   having "done service to those which by nature are no gods." (Gal. iv.
   8.) And this word, in its general acceptation, signifies the service
   which ought to be performed, or which lawfully can be, to those only
   with whom we have to do according to godliness, and this according to
   the law which is either common to mutual charity, (Gal. v. 13,) or that
   which has a more particular reference to such persons as have constant
   transactions with each other. (Ephes. vi. 5, 6.) But with those persons
   to whom the present discussion relates, (placing the angels as an
   exception,) we have according to godliness no transactions, neither are
   we bound, by any law, to them for service. To the third member our
   answer is, (1.) To offer sacrifice, to burn incense, to erect churches
   and altars, to make vows, to institute festivals, fasts and
   pilgrimages, [to angels or saints,] and to swear by their names, and
   not analogical or relative services, but univocal or having one
   purpose, and such as are due only to the true God. (2.) Though
   prostration itself is law fitly given to men on account of their
   analogical similitude to God, yet, when it is an act of religion, it is
   considered as so peculiarly due to God, that the whole of divine
   worship is designated by it alone. (1 Kings xix. 18; Matt. ix. 18.)
   Christ likewise denies prostration to the devil, (Matt. iv. 8,) and the
   angel in the Apocalypse refuses it when offered to himself. (Rev. xix.
   10.)

   XVIII. The distinct intention of the worshipers, is the Second
   subterfuge that they use to remove from themselves the idolatries of
   every kind of which they have been accused. In the first of these
   intentions they say, concerning the adoration of the sacrament of the
   Lord's supper, that their intention is to honour, not the bread, but
   the true body of Christ. In the second, that the adoration, even divine
   adoration itself, which they perform to a creature, is not offered to
   it as to God; that is, they perform the acts of worship with the design
   of procuring for the creature such esteem and veneration as in reality
   belongs only to the divine Majesty. In the third, that by giving honour
   to a creature, they do not stop there, but that God may be glorified in
   and through the creature. (Greg. de Val. lib. 2, c. 1 & 3.) In the
   fourth, that they do not honour the image itself, but its prototype. To
   all these distinctions we reply, (1.) The deed is in every case
   contrary to the intention; and they in reality do the very thing which,
   in their intention, they profess themselves desirous to avoid. (2.) The
   judgment of God is adverse to their intention; for he does not
   interpret the deed from the intention, but forms his judgment of the
   intention from the deed. God himself has exposed an intention that is
   in accordance with such a deed, although the man who does it puts in
   his protestation about his contrary intention. This intention is
   evident from the following passages: "They have made them a molten calf
   and have worshipped it, and have sacrificed thereunto, and said, these
   be thy gods, O Israel, which have brought thee up out of the land of
   Egypt." (Exod. xxxii. 8.) "He falleth down unto it and worshippeth it,
   and prayeth unto it, and saith, Deliver me, for thou art my god." (Isa.
   xliv. 17.) "They sacrificed unto devils, not to God," &c. (Deut. xxxii.
   17.) (3.) We add, if these distinctions possess any validity, neither
   Jews nor heathens could at any time have been accused of having
   committed idolatry; for, by the same distinctions as these, they would
   be able to justify all their acts of worship, whether offered to a true
   or to a false deity, to the supreme God, to inferior divinities, or to
   an image. For [on these principles] their intention never feared the
   works of their own fingers, but those persons after whose image such
   works were formed, and to whose names they were consecrated. Their
   intention never honoured angels, demons, or the minor gods, except that
   such services should redound to the honour of the supreme Deity;
   (Lactan. Inst. 1. ii c. 2;) it never wished to procure such esteem and
   veneration for them as belongs solely to the majesty of God supreme;
   and it never worshipped a false deity.

   XIX. The Third exception has a special tendency to justify the
   invocation of the virgin Mary and the saints; (Thesis 16;) for the
   papists say that they invoke them, not as the prime authors and donors
   of blessings; nor as Christ, whom God the Father hath constituted the
   high priest, and to whom he has given all power in heaven and on earth;
   but that they invoke them, in truth, as friends, intercessors and
   donors, yet in subordination to Christ. To this we reply, First, from
   the premises which they grant, they may themselves be convicted of
   idolo-dulia, or inferior worship offered to idols; for they confess
   that the invocation which they practice to the virgin Mary and to
   saints is the adoration of dulia. But they fabricate idols of the
   virgin Mary and of saints before they invoke them by heresy, both by
   falsely attributing to them the faculty of understanding their prayers,
   of interceding for sinners, not only feelingly, but also meritoriously,
   and of granting the things requested, and by presenting to them, as
   possessed of these qualifications, the worship of invocation; for this
   is the mode by which an idol is fabricated of a thing that has had a
   real existence. To this argument strength is added from the
   circumstance that, although these saints might know the things for
   which the papists pray, might intercede for them with a pious feeling,
   and, as spirits," might bestow what they have requested; yet as they
   could not bestow them, "with power" they ought not to be invoked.
   Secondly. By the words, "insubordination to Christ," they in reality
   destroy such a subordination and introduce a collaterally. If this be
   true, then on that very account they are likewise idolaters; because
   the worship, which God the Father wishes to be given to his Son, is
   that of latria, or divine adoration. For it is the will of the Father,
   "that all men should honour the Son, even as they honour the Father."
   (John v. 23.) But subordination is removed, and collaterally is
   introduced, (1.) Universally, when all these saints are said, by their
   own merits, to intercede for and to obtain blessings, and to dispense
   the blessings thus obtained, which are two tokens of the eversion of
   subordination and of the introduction of collaterally. (2.) Specially,
   this collaterally exists [from their own showing] between Christ and
   the virgin Mary; as is evident, (1.) the names under which they invoke
   her, when they denominate her "the queen of heaven," "the mistress of
   the world," "our salvation, harbor, defense, refuge and solace," who is
   able to command our Redeemer in virtue of her authority as his mother.
   These expressions place Christ in subordination to her. (2.) But this
   is likewise evident, from the cause on account of which they say she
   ought to be invoked. As a Female Advocate, because, since Christ is not
   only a man and an advocate, but likewise God and a Judge, "who will
   suffer nothing to pass unpunished; the virgin Mary, as having in her
   nothing that is harsh and unpleasant, but being all mildness and
   suavity," (Thesis 12,) ought to act as intercessor between him and
   sinners. And as a Female Dispenser of Blessings; because "God the
   Father has given half of his kingdom to her, (that is, to administer
   his mercy while he reserves the exercise of justice to himself,") and
   has conferred upon her a plenitude of all grace, that out of her
   fullness all men may receive. This is nothing less than to hurl Christ
   from his throne, and to exalt the virgin Mary in his place.

   XX. The Fourth subterfuge is the distinction between an image and an
   idol. The papists say, an image is the likeness of something real; an
   idol, that of something false. When Bellarmine explains this
   definition, he commits a fallacy; for, in interpreting "something
   false," he says, since it is a being, it is not that which it is
   feigned to be, that is, God. But that the difference which he here
   makes is a false one, many passages of Scripture prove. The image which
   Rachael purloined from her father, is called "anidol;" but it was the
   image of a man. (Gen. xxxi. 34.) Stephen calls the molten calf
   "anidol," and it was made to represent the true God. (Acts. vii. 41.)
   The calves of Jeroboam were representations or images of Jehovah, yet
   they are called "idols" by the Greek and Latin translators. (1 Kings
   xii. 28.) Micah's image is also called "an idol" and yet it was "set
   up" to Jehovah. (Judges xvii. 4; xviii, 31.) Among the "dumb idols"
   unto which, the apostle says, the Corinthians "were carried away," were
   statues of men, and probably images of "four-footed beasts, of creeping
   things, and of birds." (Rom. i. 23.) Yet Bellarmine would with
   difficulty prove that these are things, which have no existence.
   Wherefore if an idol be that which is nothing, that is, a sound without
   reality and meaning, this very distinction, which is purely an
   invention of the human brain, is itself the vainest idol, nay one of
   the veriest of idols. Such likewise are those distinctions and
   intentions which have been invented, for the establishment of idols and
   of the impious and unlawful adoration of idols, by the church of the
   malignants, by the mother of fornications, who resembles the
   "adulterous woman" mentioned in Prov. xxx. 20: "She eateth and wipeth
   her mouth, and saith, I have done no harm," or "I have not wrought
   iniquity."

   COROLLARY

   It can be proved by strong arguments from the Scriptures, that the
   Roman pontiff is himself an idol; and that they who esteem him as the
   personage that he and his followers boastingly depict him to be, and
   who present to him the honour which he demands, by those very acts shew
   themselves to be idolaters.
     __________________________________________________________________

  DISPUTATION 24

  ON THE INVOCATION OF SAINTS

  RESPONDENT: JAMES A. PORT

   I. From the hypothesis of the papists, we denominate those persons
   "saints," whom the Roman pontiff has by his canonization transferred
   into the book of saints. (Bellarm. de Beat. Sanct. lib. 1, c. 8.) From
   the truth of the matter, we also call those persons "saints," who being
   sprinkled with the blood of Jesus Christ, (1 Pet. i. 2,) and sealed
   with the characters of the Holy Spirit, the sacred fountain of all
   holiness, have been illustrious in this world by the sanctity of their
   lives, which flows from their spiritual union with Christ; but who, as
   it regards the body, being now dead, still live in heaven with Christ
   as it regards the soul. (Rev. xiv. 13.) Of this description were the
   patriarchs of old, the prophets, the apostles, the martyrs, and others
   like them. The invocation of saints is that by which men have recourse
   to their intercessions, interest, patronage and assistance, for the
   sake of imploring, intreating, and obtaining their aid.

   II. But the papists assert, that the saints are invoked for three
   reasons: (1.) That they may vouchsafe to intercede by their prayers and
   their suffrages. (2.) That, through their merits, and on account of
   them, they may obtain by their petitions the things which are asked of
   them. (3.) That they may themselves bestow the benefits which are
   required. For the papists have invested departed saints with these
   three qualities; that, being nearer to God, they have greater freedom
   of access to him and to Christ, than the faithful who are yet their
   survivors in the present life; that, by works of supererogation
   performed in this life, they have obtained by their merits [the
   privilege] that God shall hear and grant their prayers; and that they
   have been constituted by God the administrators of those blessings
   which are asked of them:

   And thus are they appointed mediators, both by merit and efficacy,
   between God, nay between Christ and living believers.

   III. Yet upon all these things the papists have not had the hardihood
   to erect, as a superstructure, the necessity of invoking the saints:
   They only say that "It is good and useful suppliantly to invoke them;"
   and that "those persons hold an impious opinion who deny that the
   saints ought to be invoked." (Can. and Dec. Coun. of Trent, Sess. 25,
   c. 2.) But perhaps by these last words, which have an ambiguous
   meaning, they wished to intimate the existence of this necessity. For
   not only does he deny that saints ought to be invoked, who says that it
   is not necessary to invoke them, but likewise he who says that it is
   not lawful: The words, when strictly taken, bear the former
   signification, that invocation is not necessary; but the latter meaning
   of its unlawfulness, when they are understood as opposed to the words
   which preceded. Even Bellarmine, when he had affixed this title, "The
   saints ought to be invoked," immediately subjoined the following
   thesis: "The saints are piously and usefully invoked by the living."
   (De Beat. Sanct. lib. 1, c. 19.) But that most subtle and evasive
   council often trifled with ambiguous expressions, being either
   compelled into such a course on account of the dissensions among its
   chief members, or else being perversely ingenious on account of its
   adversaries, whose blows it would not otherwise have been able, with
   any degree of speciousness, to avoid. We will, therefore, inquire
   concerning the invocation of saints, Is it necessary? Is it lawful and
   useful?

   IV. With regard to the First of these questions, we say, (whether the
   papists assent to our affirmation or dissent from it,) that it is not
   necessary for believers in the present state of existence to invoke the
   saints who are engaged with Christ in heaven. And since this necessity
   is--either according to the duty which surviving believers are bound to
   perform to the saints who have departed out of this life, and who are
   living with Christ; or according to the end for the sake of obtaining
   which, invocation is laid down as a necessary means; we affirm that, by
   neither of these methods is the invocation of saints necessary.

   V. (1.) It is not necessary in reference to duty; because the
   invocation of saints has neither been commanded by God, nor is it
   sanctioned with any promise or threatening, which it would of necessity
   have been if it had to be performed as a duty by the faithful during
   their continuance in the world. (2.) It is not necessary in reference
   to the means; because neither the merits nor the intervening
   administration of the saints is necessary to solicit and to obtain the
   blessings which the faithful in the present life make the subject of
   their prayers; for otherwise, the mediation and administration of
   Christ either are not sufficient, or they cannot be obtained except
   through the intercession of departed saints, both of which are false;
   and that man who was the first of the saints to enter heaven, neither
   required nor employed any saint as a previous intercessor.

   VI. Since, therefore, it is not necessary, that believers now living
   upon earth should invoke the saints who reign with Christ, if the
   papists take any pleasure in the approval of a good conscience, they
   ought to employ the utmost circumspection in ascertaining, whether it
   is not the better course to omit this invocation than to perform it,
   even though it might be made a subject of disputation whether or not it
   be lawful, about which we shall afterwards inquire. We affirm that it
   is preferable to omit all such invocation, and we support this
   assertion by two arguments, (1.) Since "whatever is not of faith," that
   is, whatsoever does not proceed from a conscience which is fully
   persuaded that the thing performed is pleasing to God, "is sin;" and
   since that may, therefore, be omitted without sin, about which even the
   smallest doubt may be entertained respecting its lawfulness, since it
   is found that it is not necessary; it follows from these premises, that
   it is better to omit than to perform invocation. (2.) Since the papists
   themselves confess, "that the difference between the worship of latria
   and that of dulia, or between divine and human adoration, is so great,
   that the man who presents that of latria to any object to which no more
   than dulia is due, is guilty of idolatry;" and since it is a matter of
   the greatest difficulty for the common people, who are ignorant and
   illiterate yet full of devotion to the saints, to observe this
   difference at all times and without any error; there is much danger
   lest those who invoke saints should fall into idolatry. This is a
   reason which also militates against the invocation of saints, even
   though it were proved that such invocation is lawful.

   VII. The next inquiry is, "Is the invocation of saints lawful and
   useful?" Or, as the Council of Trent has expressed it, "Is it good and
   useful to invoke the saints?" Or, according to Bellarmine's
   phraseology, "Are the saints piously and usefully invoked?" (De Beat.
   Sanct. lib. 1, cap, 19.) We who hold the negative, say, that it is
   neither pious nor useful to invoke the saints. We prove this assertion,
   first, generally; secondly, specially, according to the particular
   respects in which the papists invoke the saints, and maintain that they
   may be invoked.

   VIII. First. We prove generally, that it is not pious, thus:

   Since no action can, of itself and properly, come under the appellation
   of piety or godliness, except that which has been prescribed by God, by
   whose word and institution alone every action is sanctified, otherwise
   it will be common; and since it is certain, that the invocation of
   saints has not been commanded by God, it follows that such an action
   cannot be called "pious." Some action may, however, be called "pious"
   by a metalepsis, because it has been undertaken for the sake of
   performing a pious action. But such a case as this does not here occur.
   By the same argument, we demonstrate that it is not useful; because all
   religious worship, not prescribed by God, is useless, (Lev. x. 1,)
   according to the express declaration of God, (Isa. xxix. 13,) and of
   Christ: "But in vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the
   commandments of men." (Matt. xv. 9.) But the papists say, that the
   invocation of saints is religious worship.

   IX. Secondly. We prove the same thing, specially, according to the
   relations in which the papists invest the saints when they invoke them.
   (1.) We say, the saints cannot be piously and usefully invoked as the
   donors of benefits; because God has not constituted the saints
   dispensers of blessings either celestial or terrestrial; for this is
   the office bestowed on Christ, to whom the angels are under subjection
   as his servants in this ministration. Besides, if even, in imitation of
   angels, the saints did, in this world, perform their subordinate
   service to Christ at the command of God; yet they ought not on this
   account to be invoked; for, before this can be done, a full power of
   dispensing is required, which may distribute blessings as it pleases;
   but the angels render in this world only a ministerial and instrumental
   service to Christ, for which reason neither is it lawful to invoke them
   as the donors of blessings. But the saints cannot, in imitation of the
   angels, perform a service to Christ ministerially and instrumentally,
   unless we assert that they all ascend and descend after the manner of
   angels. Since, therefore, they possess neither the power nor the
   capability of bestowing blessings, it follows that they cannot be
   either piously or usefully invoked as the donors of benefits. 10. (2.)
   The saints cannot be piously and usefully invoked as those who by their
   own merits have obtained the privilege of being heard and answered by
   God; because the saints have not been able to merit any thing for
   themselves or for others. For they have accounted it needful to
   exclaim, with David, "Our goodness extendeth not to thee." (Psalm xvi.
   2.) And "when they had done all those things which were commanded
   them," they felt the necessity of confessing, not only with humility
   but with the greatest truth, "We are unprofitable servants;" (Luke
   xvii. 10;) and truly to intreat God "to forgive the iniquity of their
   sins," and "not to enter into judgment with his servants." (Psalm
   xxxii. 5; cxliii, 2.) Therefore, we cannot piously plead, in our own
   behalf, that which is falsely attributed to the saints; and that cannot
   be usefully bestowed upon others, of which the saints themselves had
   not a sufficiency.

   XI. (3.) Lastly, they cannot be piously and usefully invoked in the
   capacity of those who, as our friends, unite their prayers with ours,
   or who intercede before God by their prayers in our behalf; because the
   saints in heaven are ignorant of our particular necessities, and of the
   prayers of the faithful who are dwellers upon earth. (Isa. lxii. 16; 1
   Kings viii. 36; 2 Kings xxii. 20.) For the assertions about the mirror
   or glass of the trinity, is a very vain fable, and receives its
   refutation from this very circumstance, that those angels who always
   behold the face of God the Father, (Matt. xviii. 20,) are said to be
   ignorant of the day of judgment. (Mark xiii. 32.) Those assertions
   about a divine revelation [to the saints and angels] have a foolish and
   ridiculous circle; and those about the explanation which may be given
   by means of angels, or of the spirits of persons recently deceased, are
   equally vain; because the Scriptures make no mention of those tokens or
   indications, even in a single word: without such mention, we feel
   scrupulous, in matters of such vast importance, about receiving any
   thing as true, or about undertaking to do any thing as pious and
   useful.

   XII. We add, finally, that by the invocation of saints, the papists are
   injurious towards Christ, and, therefore, cannot engage in such
   invocation without sacrilege. They are unjust to Christ in two ways:
   (1.) Because they communicate to the saints the office of our Mediator
   and Advocate, which has been committed by the Father to Christ alone;
   and the power conferred [on that office]. (1 Tim. ii. 5; Rom. viii. 34;
   1 John ii. 1.) Neither are they excused by what they say about the
   saints being subordinate to Christ; for by the circumstance of their
   alleging the merits of saints, and of their invoking them as the
   dispensers of blessings, they destroy this subordination and establish
   a collaterally. (2.) Because they detract greatly from that benevolent
   affection of Christ towards his people, from his most merciful
   inclination, and from that most prompt and ready desire to commiserate,
   which he manifests. These properties are proposed to us in the
   Scriptures in a manner the most lucid and plain, that, not being
   terrified with the consideration of our own unworthiness, we may
   approach, with confidence and freedom, to the throne of grace, "that we
   may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need." (Heb. iv.
   16.)

   XIII. When we say that the saints must not be invoked, we do not take
   away all veneration from them, as the papists calumniously assert. For
   we confess that their memory is to be venerated with a grateful
   celebration. But we circumscribe our veneration within these bounds:
   First. We commemorate with thanksgiving the eminent gifts which have
   been conferred on them, and commend them for having faithfully used
   those gifts in the exercises of faith, hope and charity. Secondly. As
   much as in us lies, we imitate their examples, and endeavour to
   demonstrate, by our works, that the holy conversation which they had in
   this world is grateful to us who aspire to be like them. Lastly. We
   congratulate them on the felicity which they enjoy with Christ in the
   presence of God; and with devotion of soul we earnestly pray for the
   same felicity for ourselves, while we hope and trust that we shall
   enjoy it through the all-sufficient intercession of Christ, through
   which, alone, they also themselves have been made partakers of eternal
   happiness.

   COROLLARY

   In the invocation of saints, do the papists commit idolatry?

   We decide in the affirmative.
     __________________________________________________________________

  DISPUTATION 25

  ON MAGISTRACY

  RESPONDENT: JOHN LE CHANTRE

   I. Not feeling much anxiety about the origin and etymology of the word,
   we say that from the manner in which it is used, it has two meanings:
   for it either signifies in the abstract, the power and the function
   itself; or, in the concrete, the person who is constituted the
   administrator of this function with power. But, because the abstract
   consideration is more simple, and lays down the law to the concrete,
   therefore we will occupy ourselves first and chiefly in the description
   of it. (John xix. 10, 11; Ephes. i. 21; Rom. xiii. 1.)

   II. We therefore define magistracy, in the abstract, a power
   pre-eminent and administrative, or a function with a preeminent power,
   instituted and preserved by God for this purpose, that men may, in the
   society of their fellow-men, "lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all
   godliness and honesty," in true piety and righteousness, for their own
   salvation and to the glory of God. (Rom. xiii. 1-3; 1 Tim. ii. 2; 1
   Pet. ii. 13; Prov. xxix. 4; Psalm 62; Isa. xlv. 22, 23.) For the more
   extensive explanation of this definition, we will consider the
   object--the efficient and the end, which are the external causes of
   this function, and the matter and the form, which are the internal
   causes, from which we will derive all the rest.

   III. The object of this function is the multitude of man kind, who are
   sociable animals, and bound to each other by many ties of indigence and
   communication according both to nature and grace, and who live together
   in common society. This object, likewise, comprehends the end for
   which, that is, those for whose benefit magistracy has been instituted.
   Hence, likewise, this power deservedly obtains the name of public
   authority," as it is, first, immediately and principally occupied
   concerning the condition and conduct of all the people and the whole
   society; but, secondarily, concerning the state and benefit of each
   member, though it intends, of itself, both the good of the whole, and
   that of each individual in the entire society. (Num. xi. 12; 2 Chron.
   i. 9, 10; Rom. xii. 4, 5; 1 Cor. xii. 12-27; Ezek. xxxiv. 2.)

   IV. The efficient cause which not only institutes magistracy, but also
   maintains it, is God himself. In him must be considered power purely
   free and independent, the best will, and the greatest capability, as
   the principles of its institution and preservation. (1.) Power rests on
   creation, and through that, upon the right of the dominion which God
   has over all created things, but especially over men. (Rom. xiii. 1, 2;
   John xix. 10, 11; Psalm xxiv. 1 Jeremiah xxvii. 2, 6.) (2.) The will of
   God, in its institution, is through four kinds of his love: (i.) His
   love of order among all created things; (1 Cor. xiv. 33;) (ii.) His
   love towards men themselves, both towards those who are placed in
   authority, above others, and especially towards those who are put in
   subjection; (2 Cor. ix. 8; 2 Kings xi. 17;) (iii.) His love of
   obedience to his own law; (Judges ii. 16, 17; 2 Chron. xxxiv. 31 32;)
   (iv.) His love of that submission which those who are equals by nature,
   render to others who are their superiors, merely through the will or
   good pleasure of God. (Psalm ii. 9, 12.) (3.) But Capability, and that
   of the highest kind, was likewise necessary for this purpose, both on
   account of that ambition of being eminent with which men are infected,
   and on account of the power or capability of an infinite multitude; and
   it is employed by God through an internal impression upon the hearts of
   men, of the necessity of this order, (1 Sam. x. 26; xi, 7,) and through
   the external defense of it. (Josh. i. 5-9.)

   V. The end of the institution of magistracy, is the good of the whole,
   and of each individual of which it is composed, both an animal [or
   natural] good, "that they may lead quiet and peaceable lives;" (1 Tim.
   ii. 2;) and a spiritual good, that they may live in this world, to God,
   and may in heaven enjoy that good, to the glory of God who is its
   author. (Rom. xiii. 4.) For since man, according to his two-fold life,
   (that is, the animal and the spiritual,) stands in need of each kind of
   good, (Num. xi. 12, 13,) and is, by nature of the image of God, capable
   of both kinds; (Gen. i. 26; Col. iii. 10;) since two collateral powers
   cannot stand, (Matt. vi. 24; 1 Cor. xiv. 33,) and since animal good is
   directed to that which is spiritual, (Matt. vi. 33,) and animal life is
   subordinate to that which is spiritual, (Gal. ii. 20; 1 Cor. xv. 32,)
   it is unlawful to divide those two benefits, and to separate their
   joint superintendence, either in reality or by the administration of
   the supreme authority; for, if the animal life and its good become the
   only objects of solicitude, such an administration is that of cattle.
   But if human society be brought to such a condition that the spiritual
   life, only, prevails, then this power [of magistracy] is no longer
   necessary. (1 Cor. xv. 24.)

   VI. The matter, of which this administration consists, are the acts
   necessary to produce that end. These actions, we comprehend in the
   three following classes: (1.) The first is Legislation, under which we
   also comprise the care of the moral law, according to both tables, and
   the enacting of subordinate laws with respect to places, times and
   persons, by which laws, provision may be the better made for the
   observance of that immovable law, and the various societies, being
   restricted to certain relations, may be the more correctly governed;
   that is, ecclesiastical, civil, scholastic and domestic associations.
   (Exod. xviii. 18-20; 2 Chron. xix. 6-8; 2 Kings xiii. 4, 5.) (2.) The
   second contains the vocation to delegated offices or duties, and the
   oversight of all actions and things which are necessary to the whole
   society. (Deut. i. 13, 15, 16; Exod. xviii. 21, 22; 1 Pet. ii. 14; 2
   Chron. xix. 2, 8-11, Num. xi. 13-17.) (3.) The third is either the
   eradication of all evils out of the society, if they be internal, or
   the warding of them off, if they be external, even with war, if that be
   necessary, and the safety of society should require it. (Prov. xx. 26,
   28; Psalm ci. 8; 1 Tim. ii. 2.)

   VII. The form is the power itself, according to which these functions
   themselves are discharged, with an authority that is subject to God
   alone, and pre-eminently above whatever is human; (Rom. xiii. 1; Psalm
   lxxxii. 1, 6; Lament. iv. 20;) for this inspires spirit and life, and
   gives efficacy to these functions. It is enunciated "power by right of
   the sword," by which the good may be defended, and the bad terrified,
   restrained and punished, and all men compelled to perform their
   prescribed duties. (Rom. xiii. 4, 5.) To this power, as supreme,
   belongs the authority of demanding, from those under subjection,
   tribute, custom, and other burdens. These resemble the sinews, by which
   the authority and power necessary for these functions, are held
   together and established. (Rom. xiii. 6.)

   VIII. But though there was no employment for this power before the
   introduction of sin into the world, because there were then only two
   human beings, both of whom were comprised in one family; yet we are of
   opinion, that it would also have had a place in the primitive integrity
   of mankind, and that it had not its origin from the entrance of sin;
   for we think this can be proved from the nature of man, who is a social
   animal, and was capable of deviating from his duty--from the limits of
   this power--from the causes which induced God to institute it--from the
   natural and moral law itself, and from the impression of this power on
   the hearts of men, provided any great number of men had been propagated
   prior to the commission of the first sin. (Gen. iii. 6; 1 Tim. ii.
   1-iv, ; 1 Kings x. 9; Exod. xx. 12-17.)

   IX. But this power is always the same according to the nature of its
   function and the prerogative of its authority; and it suffers no
   variation, either from the difference in number of those to whom this
   power is confided in a monarchy, an aristocracy, or a democracy, or
   from the difference of the manner in which this power is given, whether
   it be derived immediately from God, or it be obtained by human right
   and custom through succession, inheritance and election. Under all
   these circumstances, it remains the same, unless a limitation,
   restricted to certain conditions, be added by God, or by those who
   possess the right of conferring such a power. (Josh. xxii. 12; 1 Tim.
   ii. 2; 1 Pet. ii. 13; Judges 20; 1 Sam. xvi. 12; 2 Sam. 1; 1 Kings xi.
   11, 12; xiv, 8-10.) And this limitation is equally binding on both
   parties; nor is it lawful for him who has accepted of this authority,
   by rescinding the conditions, to assume a greater power to himself,
   under the pretext that those conditions are opposed to his conscience
   or to his condition, and that they are even injurious to the society
   itself.

   X. Since the end of this power is the good of the whole, or of the
   entire association of men, who belong to the same country or state, it
   follows that the prince of this state is less than the state itself,
   and that its benefit is not only to be preferred to his own, but that
   it is also to be purchased with his detriment, nay, at the expense of
   life itself. (Ezek. xxxiv. 2-4; 1 Sam. xii. 2, 3; viii, 20.) Though, in
   return, every member of the state is bound to defend, with all his
   powers, yet in a lawful manner, the life, safety and dignity of the
   prince, as the father of his country. (2 Sam. xvi. 3.)

   XI. From the circumstance, also, of this power having been instituted
   by God and restricted within certain laws, we conclude that it is not
   lawful for him who possesses it, to lift up himself against God, to
   enact laws contrary to the divine laws, and either to compel the people
   who are committed to his care to the perpetration of acts which are
   forbidden by God, or to prevent them from performing such acts as he
   has commanded. If he acts thus, let him assuredly know, that he must
   render an account to God, and that the people are bound to obey the
   Almighty in preference to him. (Deut. xvii. 18, 19; 1 Kings xii. 28-30;
   xiii, 2; 1 Kings xxii. 5.) Yet, on this point, the people ought to
   observe two cautions: (1.) To distinguish actions which are to be
   performed, from burdens which are to be borne. (2.) To be perfectly
   sure that the orders of the prince are in opposition to the divine
   commands. Without a due observance of these cautions, they will, by a
   precipitate judgment, commit an act of disobedience against the prince,
   to whom, in that matter, they are able, in an orderly manner, under
   God, to be obedient.

   XII. The functions which we have described as essential to this power,
   are not subject to the arbitrary will of the prince, whether he may
   neglect either the whole of them, or one of the three. If he act thus,
   he renders himself unworthy of the name of "prince;" and it would be a
   better course for him to resign the dignity of his office, than to be a
   trifling loiterer in the discharge of its functions. (Psalm lxxxii.
   1-8; Ezek. xi. 1-13.) But here, also, a two-fold distinction must be
   used: (1.) Between a degree of idleness accruing from the function, and
   vice coming into it. (2.) Between loitering, and hindering these duties
   from being performed in the commonwealth; for the latter of these
   faults (hindrance) would bring speedy destruction to the society, while
   the commonwealth can consist with the former, (laziness,) provided
   other persons be permitted to perform those duties.

   XIII. We conclude further, from the author of the institution from the
   end and the use of the office--from the functions which pertain to it,
   and from the pre-eminent power itself, when they are all compared with
   the nature of Christianity, that a Christian man can, with a good
   conscience, accept of the office and perform the duties of magistracy;
   nay, that no one is more suitable than he for discharging the duties of
   this office, and, which is still more, that no person can legitimately
   and perfectly fulfill all its duties except a Christian. Yet, by this
   affirmation, we do not mean to deny that a legitimate magistracy exists
   among other nations than those which are Christian. (Acts x. 31, 48;
   Exod. xviii. 20-23.)

   XIV. Lastly. Because this power is pre eminent, we assert that every
   soul is subject to it by divine right, whether he be a layman or a
   clergyman, a deacon, priest, or bishop, an archbishop, cardinal, or
   patriarch, or even the Roman pontiff himself; so that it is the duty of
   every one to obey the commands of the magistrate, to acknowledge his
   tribunal, to await the sentence, and to submit to the punishment which
   he may award. From such obedience and subjection the prince himself
   cannot grant any man immunity and exemption; although in apportioning
   those burdens which are to be borne, he can yield his prerogative to
   some persons. (Rom. xiii. 1; 1 Pet. ii. 13; v, 1; John xix. 10, 11;
   Acts xxv. 1, 10; 1 Kings i. 26, 27; Rom. xiii. 5.)

   END OF THE PUBLIC DISPUTATIONS.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [1]1   [2]1:2   [3]1:2   [4]1:2   [5]1:2   [6]1:3   [7]1:3   [8]1:9
   [9]1:20   [10]1:20   [11]1:21   [12]1:21   [13]1:26   [14]1:26
   [15]1:26   [16]1:27   [17]1:27   [18]1:27   [19]1:27   [20]1:31
   [21]1:31   [22]1:31   [23]1:31   [24]2:3   [25]2:4   [26]2:7
   [27]2:9   [28]2:10   [29]2:16   [30]2:16   [31]2:16   [32]2:16
   [33]2:16   [34]2:16   [35]2:16   [36]2:17   [37]2:17   [38]2:17
   [39]2:17   [40]2:17   [41]2:17   [42]2:17   [43]2:17   [44]2:17
   [45]2:17   [46]2:17   [47]2:17   [48]2:17   [49]2:23   [50]3
   [51]3:1   [52]3:3-6   [53]3:4   [54]3:5   [55]3:5   [56]3:5   [57]3:6
   [58]3:6   [59]3:6   [60]3:6   [61]3:7-12   [62]3:9-19   [63]3:11
   [64]3:15   [65]3:15   [66]3:15   [67]3:15   [68]3:15   [69]3:23
   [70]3:24   [71]4:7   [72]5:24   [73]6:3   [74]6:5   [75]8   [76]8:21
   [77]9:22   [78]12   [79]12:1-3   [80]12:2   [81]12:3   [82]15
   [83]15:6   [84]15:6   [85]15:6   [86]15:6   [87]15:8   [88]17:1
   [89]17:1   [90]17:7   [91]17:13   [92]17:14   [93]20:6   [94]20:6
   [95]20:6   [96]21:33   [97]22:16   [98]22:16   [99]22:17   [100]22:17
   [101]22:18   [102]22:18   [103]24:12   [104]26:13   [105]31:34
   [106]31:53   [107]37   [108]37   [109]37:1   [110]37:20   [111]37:26
   [112]37:26   [113]37:26   [114]37:26   [115]37:27   [116]37:27
   [117]37:27   [118]37:27   [119]37:27   [120]38:18   [121]38:18
   [122]39:8   [123]39:8   [124]39:9   [125]39:9   [126]45:5   [127]45:8
   [128]45:8   [129]45:28   [130]49:3   [131]49:10   [132]49:10

   Exodus

   [133]3:15   [134]4:1   [135]4:21   [136]4:21   [137]5:1   [138]6:3
   [139]7   [140]7   [141]7:4   [142]7:4   [143]9:16   [144]9:16
   [145]12:41   [146]12:44   [147]13:2   [148]16:10   [149]18:18-20
   [150]18:20-23   [151]18:21   [152]18:22   [153]19:6   [154]19:6
   [155]19:18   [156]20   [157]20:1   [158]20:1   [159]20:1   [160]20:2
   [161]20:2   [162]20:2   [163]20:2   [164]20:3   [165]20:3-5
   [166]20:3-5   [167]20:3-5   [168]20:4   [169]20:5   [170]20:12-17
   [171]20:18   [172]20:23   [173]21   [174]22   [175]23   [176]24
   [177]24:5   [178]24:6   [179]24:7   [180]30:1   [181]30:18
   [182]32:4   [183]32:4   [184]32:5   [185]32:8   [186]32:8   [187]32:9
   [188]32:10   [189]32:10-14   [190]32:12   [191]32:28   [192]32:31
   [193]32:32   [194]32:32   [195]32:33   [196]33:18   [197]33:20
   [198]34:1   [199]34:6   [200]34:6

   Leviticus

   [201]10:1   [202]17:14   [203]18:21   [204]18:21   [205]19:2
   [206]26:46

   Numbers

   [207]11:12   [208]11:12   [209]11:13   [210]11:13-17   [211]12
   [212]14:16   [213]14:17   [214]14:21   [215]16   [216]21:5-7
   [217]23   [218]23   [219]23:19   [220]23:19   [221]23:19   [222]24:17
   [223]25:2

   Deuteronomy

   [224]1:13   [225]1:15   [226]1:16   [227]4:2   [228]4:5   [229]4:6
   [230]4:8   [231]4:8   [232]4:14   [233]4:15   [234]4:15
   [235]4:15-19   [236]4:16   [237]4:16   [238]4:24   [239]4:35
   [240]5:6   [241]5:26-31   [242]6   [243]6:4   [244]6:5   [245]6:5
   [246]6:5   [247]6:13   [248]6:13   [249]6:19   [250]7:7   [251]7:7
   [252]7:8   [253]7:8   [254]12   [255]12   [256]12:28   [257]13
   [258]13:1-3   [259]13:6   [260]15:1   [261]15:2   [262]17:15
   [263]17:18   [264]17:19   [265]17:19   [266]18:15   [267]18:15
   [268]18:16   [269]23:2   [270]25:15   [271]25:16   [272]27:26
   [273]28   [274]28   [275]28:58   [276]28:63   [277]29:17   [278]29:29
   [279]29:29   [280]30   [281]30:10-14   [282]31   [283]31:16
   [284]31:16   [285]31:17   [286]31:27-29   [287]32   [288]32:14-17
   [289]32:16   [290]32:17   [291]32:17   [292]32:17   [293]32:21
   [294]32:26   [295]32:27   [296]32:27   [297]32:35   [298]33:9

   Joshua

   [299]1:5-9   [300]1:7   [301]1:8   [302]1:8   [303]1:9   [304]10:13
   [305]22:12   [306]24:19

   Judges

   [307]2:7   [308]2:10   [309]2:16   [310]2:17   [311]6:36   [312]13:23
   [313]14:6   [314]17:4   [315]18   [316]18:31   [317]20   [318]20:2

   1 Samuel

   [319]2:25   [320]2:25   [321]2:25   [322]2:30   [323]2:30   [324]2:30
   [325]2:30   [326]8   [327]8:20   [328]9:1   [329]10:26   [330]11
   [331]11:7   [332]12:2   [333]12:3   [334]12:25   [335]15:17
   [336]15:21   [337]15:22   [338]15:22   [339]15:23   [340]15:24
   [341]15:25   [342]16:7   [343]16:12   [344]16:14   [345]20:31
   [346]20:32   [347]21:13   [348]23:11   [349]23:11   [350]23:11
   [351]23:11-13   [352]23:12   [353]23:12   [354]23:12   [355]24:7
   [356]24:7   [357]24:7   [358]24:17-19   [359]25:13   [360]25:21
   [361]25:22   [362]25:22   [363]25:26   [364]25:26   [365]25:31

   2 Samuel

   [366]1   [367]7   [368]7:12   [369]7:12-16   [370]7:14   [371]11
   [372]11:15   [373]12:11   [374]12:11   [375]12:11   [376]12:11-12
   [377]12:11-13   [378]12:11-13   [379]12:12   [380]12:12   [381]12:12
   [382]15   [383]15:16   [384]16   [385]16   [386]16:3   [387]16:3
   [388]16:4   [389]16:20-23   [390]16:21-23   [391]17   [392]17
   [393]17:14   [394]23:2   [395]23:3   [396]24:1

   1 Kings

   [397]1:26   [398]1:27   [399]2:9   [400]4   [401]8   [402]8:1
   [403]8:11   [404]8:27   [405]8:36   [406]8:39   [407]8:39   [408]8:39
   [409]8:46   [410]10:9   [411]11:4   [412]11:5   [413]11:7
   [414]11:11   [415]11:12   [416]12   [417]12:16   [418]12:28
   [419]12:28   [420]12:28-30   [421]12:30   [422]12:31-33   [423]12:32
   [424]13   [425]13   [426]13:2   [427]13:4   [428]14   [429]14
   [430]14:8-10   [431]14:9   [432]14:10   [433]14:11   [434]14:16
   [435]16:31   [436]17:24   [437]18:21   [438]18:37   [439]19
   [440]19:18   [441]19:18   [442]19:18   [443]21   [444]21   [445]21:27
   [446]22:5

   2 Kings

   [447]1   [448]1   [449]1   [450]1   [451]2:11   [452]2:13   [453]2:13
   [454]3   [455]11:17   [456]13:4   [457]13:5   [458]16:3   [459]17:11
   [460]17:16   [461]17:35   [462]17:35   [463]18:4   [464]19   [465]22:20

   1 Chronicles

   [466]21:1   [467]24   [468]25   [469]28:9

   2 Chronicles

   [470]1:9   [471]1:10   [472]12:7   [473]12:7-9   [474]12:8
   [475]13:2   [476]13:8   [477]13:10   [478]13:15-20   [479]19:2
   [480]19:6-8   [481]19:8-11   [482]25:14   [483]25:20   [484]25:20
   [485]26:18   [486]26:18-21   [487]26:21   [488]34:31

   Ezra

   [489]1:1

   Job

   [490]1   [491]1   [492]1   [493]1   [494]1   [495]1:11   [496]1:12
   [497]1:12   [498]1:22   [499]2   [500]2   [501]2:9   [502]2:10
   [503]11:8   [504]11:9   [505]21   [506]31:1   [507]31:2   [508]33:4
   [509]33:4   [510]33:4

   Psalms

   [511]1   [512]1:1   [513]1:1-23   [514]1:2   [515]1:21   [516]2
   [517]2   [518]2   [519]2   [520]2:3   [521]2:6   [522]2:6   [523]2:7
   [524]2:8   [525]2:8   [526]2:8   [527]2:9   [528]2:10   [529]2:10-12
   [530]2:10-12   [531]2:11   [532]2:12   [533]5   [534]5:3-5   [535]5:4
   [536]5:5   [537]5:5   [538]5:5   [539]5:5   [540]8:1   [541]9:8
   [542]10   [543]10:13   [544]10:14   [545]11:5   [546]11:7   [547]11:7
   [548]11:7   [549]13:1   [550]13:2   [551]16:2   [552]16:2   [553]16:9
   [554]16:10   [555]16:11   [556]18   [557]18:1   [558]18:2   [559]19:1
   [560]19:1   [561]19:1-8   [562]19:7-9   [563]19:12   [564]22
   [565]24   [566]24:1   [567]24:8-10   [568]25:14   [569]25:14
   [570]27:4   [571]30:5   [572]32:1   [573]32:1   [574]32:1-6
   [575]32:2   [576]32:5   [577]32:5   [578]32:6   [579]32:6   [580]33
   [581]33:9   [582]33:9   [583]33:9   [584]33:11   [585]34:14
   [586]34:14   [587]34:15   [588]36   [589]36:7   [590]36:10
   [591]40:6   [592]40:6-8   [593]40:7   [594]40:8   [595]40:8
   [596]42:2   [597]45:7   [598]45:7   [599]45:7   [600]45:9   [601]46:1
   [602]46:2   [603]51:10   [604]51:13   [605]62   [606]62   [607]62:2
   [608]62:3   [609]62:6   [610]68:17   [611]73   [612]73:25   [613]80
   [614]81   [615]81:9   [616]81:11-14   [617]81:12   [618]81:13
   [619]81:13   [620]81:13   [621]81:13   [622]81:13-16   [623]82:1
   [624]82:1   [625]82:1-8   [626]82:6   [627]82:6   [628]89
   [629]89:5-8   [630]89:21   [631]89:27   [632]90:9   [633]91:11
   [634]91:11   [635]94   [636]94:9   [637]94:9   [638]94:9   [639]94:9
   [640]94:10   [641]94:10   [642]94:10   [643]94:10   [644]94:11
   [645]95:3   [646]95:7   [647]95:8   [648]96   [649]96:6-9
   [650]101:8   [651]102   [652]102:25   [653]102:26   [654]102:27
   [655]102:27   [656]103:9   [657]103:10   [658]103:13   [659]103:14
   [660]104:4   [661]104:20   [662]104:24   [663]104:29   [664]104:30
   [665]104:37   [666]104:38   [667]104:148   [668]105:17   [669]105:25
   [670]106:31   [671]110   [672]110   [673]110:1   [674]110:1
   [675]110:1-3   [676]110:2   [677]110:3   [678]110:3   [679]110:3
   [680]110:4   [681]110:4   [682]110:4   [683]110:4   [684]110:4
   [685]115:3   [686]115:3   [687]115:3   [688]115:3   [689]115:3
   [690]115:4-8   [691]115:8   [692]116:12   [693]116:13   [694]118:22
   [695]118:22   [696]118:22   [697]118:23   [698]118:23   [699]119
   [700]119:67   [701]119:67   [702]119:71   [703]119:98   [704]119:105
   [705]119:105   [706]119:105   [707]119:105   [708]119:106
   [709]119:137   [710]122   [711]122:3   [712]122:6   [713]124:2
   [714]124:2   [715]124:3   [716]124:3   [717]125:3   [718]125:3
   [719]135:1   [720]139   [721]139:4   [722]139:7   [723]139:7-12
   [724]139:8   [725]139:8-12   [726]143   [727]143   [728]143:2
   [729]143:2   [730]143:2   [731]143:2   [732]143:2   [733]144:15
   [734]145:3   [735]145:17   [736]147:4   [737]147:5   [738]147:5
   [739]147:5   [740]147:5   [741]147:5   [742]147:20

   Proverbs

   [743]1:24   [744]1:24   [745]1:24-26   [746]1:24-26   [747]8
   [748]8:22-24   [749]16:4   [750]16:4   [751]16:4   [752]16:4
   [753]16:4   [754]16:9   [755]20:26   [756]20:28   [757]21:1
   [758]29:4   [759]30:20

   Ecclesiastes

   [760]12:7

   Song of Solomon

   [761]8   [762]8:8

   Isaiah

   [763]1:1   [764]1:15   [765]1:24   [766]2:3   [767]2:3   [768]2:3
   [769]4:8   [770]4:9   [771]5:4   [772]5:4   [773]5:4   [774]5:4
   [775]5:4   [776]5:4   [777]5:5   [778]5:5   [779]5:23   [780]6
   [781]6:3   [782]6:7   [783]6:9   [784]6:9   [785]6:9   [786]6:10
   [787]6:10   [788]6:10   [789]7:14   [790]8:14   [791]9:15   [792]10:5
   [793]10:5-7   [794]10:5-7   [795]10:5-12   [796]10:5-12   [797]10:6
   [798]10:7   [799]10:15   [800]11:2   [801]11:2   [802]11:2
   [803]11:2   [804]11:2   [805]11:2   [806]11:2   [807]27:4
   [808]28:16   [809]28:21   [810]29:13   [811]30:21   [812]31:6
   [813]37   [814]37:28   [815]38:8   [816]40:12   [817]40:13
   [818]40:14   [819]40:15   [820]40:17   [821]40:17   [822]40:18
   [823]40:19   [824]40:20   [825]40:22   [826]40:22   [827]40:22
   [828]40:23   [829]40:25   [830]40:28   [831]40:28   [832]41
   [833]41:12   [834]41:23   [835]41:25   [836]41:26   [837]42:8
   [838]43:5   [839]43:7   [840]43:10   [841]43:10   [842]44   [843]44:6
   [844]44:6   [845]44:7   [846]44:7   [847]44:7   [848]44:8   [849]44:8
   [850]44:8   [851]44:9   [852]44:12   [853]44:15   [854]44:17
   [855]44:17   [856]45:5   [857]45:20   [858]45:20   [859]45:22
   [860]45:23   [861]48:8   [862]48:8   [863]48:9   [864]48:18
   [865]48:19   [866]49:15   [867]53:1   [868]53:4-6   [869]53:5
   [870]53:10   [871]53:10   [872]53:10   [873]53:10-12   [874]53:11
   [875]53:11   [876]53:11   [877]54:8   [878]55:9   [879]59:21
   [880]61:1   [881]61:1   [882]61:1   [883]62:5   [884]62:16
   [885]63:3-5   [886]63:6   [887]63:10   [888]63:10   [889]63:10
   [890]65:1   [891]66:1   [892]66:4

   Jeremiah

   [893]1:8   [894]1:12   [895]2:5-8   [896]2:11   [897]2:11-13
   [898]2:13   [899]2:20   [900]2:27   [901]2:27   [902]3:5   [903]4:1
   [904]4:2   [905]5:7   [906]5:7   [907]5:9   [908]9:9   [909]9:9
   [910]9:24   [911]9:24   [912]10:3   [913]10:5   [914]10:9
   [915]10:11   [916]10:14   [917]10:14   [918]10:24   [919]11
   [920]11:3   [921]11:8-13   [922]12   [923]12:13   [924]13:10
   [925]13:23   [926]17   [927]17:9   [928]18:6   [929]18:6   [930]18:6
   [931]18:6   [932]18:7   [933]18:8   [934]18:8-10   [935]23:5
   [936]23:7   [937]23:8   [938]23:24   [939]27:2   [940]27:6
   [941]28:8   [942]31   [943]31:18   [944]31:18   [945]31:31-34
   [946]31:31-34   [947]31:32   [948]31:32   [949]31:33   [950]31:33
   [951]31:33   [952]31:33   [953]31:33   [954]32   [955]32   [956]32:38
   [957]32:38-40   [958]32:39   [959]32:40   [960]32:40

   Lamentations

   [961]3:22   [962]3:33   [963]3:37   [964]3:37   [965]3:38   [966]3:38
   [967]4:20

   Ezekiel

   [968]2:5   [969]3:6   [970]5   [971]5:1-3   [972]8:10   [973]8:11
   [974]8:11   [975]11:1-13   [976]11:19   [977]11:19   [978]13:13
   [979]13:14   [980]13:18   [981]16:3-63   [982]16:6   [983]16:20
   [984]18:23   [985]18:23   [986]18:28   [987]18:32   [988]21:19
   [989]21:19-22   [990]25:11   [991]33:11   [992]34:2   [993]34:2-4
   [994]34:23   [995]34:24   [996]36:25   [997]36:26   [998]36:26
   [999]37:24   [1000]37:25

   Daniel

   [1001]3:17   [1002]3:18   [1003]3:18   [1004]6:46   [1005]9:24
   [1006]9:24   [1007]9:25   [1008]9:25   [1009]9:26   [1010]9:26

   Hosea

   [1011]2:6   [1012]2:6   [1013]2:6   [1014]2:6   [1015]2:7   [1016]2:7
   [1017]2:7   [1018]2:21   [1019]2:22   [1020]11:9   [1021]13:11

   Joel

   [1022]2:13   [1023]2:28   [1024]2:28

   Amos

   [1025]2:8   [1026]5:21   [1027]5:21-24

   Micah

   [1028]3:8   [1029]4:2   [1030]4:2   [1031]5:2   [1032]5:2   [1033]5:3
   [1034]6:6-8   [1035]6:6-8   [1036]6:8

   Zephaniah

   [1037]2:11

   Haggai

   [1038]2:7

   Zechariah

   [1039]1:3   [1040]11:15-17   [1041]12:10   [1042]12:10   [1043]13:1
   [1044]13:2

   Malachi

   [1045]1:6   [1046]1:6   [1047]1:10   [1048]1:10   [1049]1:10
   [1050]1:11   [1051]1:11   [1052]2:7   [1053]2:17   [1054]3
   [1055]3:1   [1056]3:1   [1057]3:6   [1058]3:6   [1059]3:6
   [1060]3:14   [1061]4:4   [1062]4:4   [1063]5:7

   Matthew

   [1064]1   [1065]1   [1066]1:21   [1067]2   [1068]2:2   [1069]2:6
   [1070]3:1   [1071]3:2   [1072]3:8   [1073]3:8   [1074]3:9   [1075]3:9
   [1076]3:9   [1077]3:16   [1078]3:17   [1079]4:3   [1080]4:4
   [1081]4:8   [1082]4:10   [1083]4:17   [1084]4:18   [1085]4:19
   [1086]5:9   [1087]5:12   [1088]5:12   [1089]5:15   [1090]5:16
   [1091]5:16   [1092]5:19   [1093]5:45   [1094]5:45   [1095]5:48
   [1096]5:48   [1097]6:2   [1098]6:13   [1099]6:24   [1100]6:33
   [1101]6:33   [1102]6:33   [1103]7   [1104]7:11   [1105]7:17
   [1106]7:18   [1107]8:2   [1108]8:11   [1109]9   [1110]9:13
   [1111]9:13   [1112]9:13   [1113]9:13   [1114]9:13   [1115]9:13
   [1116]9:13   [1117]9:18   [1118]10:11-13   [1119]10:11-13
   [1120]10:16   [1121]10:20   [1122]10:20   [1123]10:30
   [1124]10:31-36   [1125]11   [1126]11   [1127]11   [1128]11:5
   [1129]11:11   [1130]11:11-13   [1131]11:17   [1132]11:19
   [1133]11:20   [1134]11:21   [1135]11:21   [1136]11:21   [1137]11:21
   [1138]11:21   [1139]11:21-23   [1140]11:23   [1141]11:23
   [1142]11:23   [1143]11:25   [1144]11:25   [1145]11:25   [1146]11:25
   [1147]11:25   [1148]11:25-27   [1149]11:26   [1150]11:26
   [1151]11:27   [1152]11:27   [1153]11:27   [1154]11:27   [1155]11:27
   [1156]11:28   [1157]11:28   [1158]11:28   [1159]11:28   [1160]11:29
   [1161]11:30   [1162]11:30   [1163]12:25   [1164]12:28   [1165]12:30
   [1166]12:31   [1167]12:32   [1168]12:32   [1169]12:38   [1170]12:39
   [1171]13   [1172]13:2   [1173]13:11   [1174]13:11   [1175]13:12
   [1176]13:23   [1177]15:9   [1178]15:9   [1179]15:19   [1180]16
   [1181]16   [1182]16:1   [1183]16:17   [1184]16:18   [1185]16:18
   [1186]16:24   [1187]16:25   [1188]16:28   [1189]17:2-5   [1190]17:5
   [1191]17:5   [1192]17:5   [1193]18:10   [1194]18:20   [1195]18:32
   [1196]19:17   [1197]19:17   [1198]19:17   [1199]20:14   [1200]20:15
   [1201]20:16   [1202]20:28   [1203]20:28   [1204]21:22   [1205]21:23
   [1206]21:33   [1207]21:39-41   [1208]21:42   [1209]21:46
   [1210]21:46   [1211]22   [1212]22:29   [1213]22:36-39
   [1214]22:37-40   [1215]22:37-40   [1216]23   [1217]23:4   [1218]23:23
   [1219]23:37   [1220]23:37   [1221]23:37   [1222]23:38   [1223]24
   [1224]24   [1225]24:14   [1226]24:22   [1227]24:22   [1228]24:36
   [1229]25   [1230]25   [1231]25:19-30   [1232]25:41   [1233]25:41
   [1234]26   [1235]26:2   [1236]26:14   [1237]26:15   [1238]26:24
   [1239]26:26   [1240]26:28   [1241]26:28   [1242]26:28   [1243]26:28
   [1244]26:28   [1245]26:53   [1246]26:53   [1247]26:70   [1248]27
   [1249]27:3   [1250]27:42   [1251]28:18   [1252]28:18   [1253]28:18-20
   [1254]28:19   [1255]28:19   [1256]28:19   [1257]28:19   [1258]28:19
   [1259]28:19   [1260]28:19   [1261]28:19   [1262]28:19   [1263]28:19
   [1264]28:19   [1265]28:20   [1266]28:20   [1267]28:20   [1268]28:20
   [1269]28:20   [1270]48

   Mark

   [1271]1:4   [1272]1:14   [1273]1:15   [1274]1:15   [1275]1:15
   [1276]3:35   [1277]10:18   [1278]10:18   [1279]12:7   [1280]13:32
   [1281]14:36   [1282]14:38   [1283]14:56   [1284]16   [1285]16:15
   [1286]16:15   [1287]16:16   [1288]16:16   [1289]16:16   [1290]16:17
   [1291]16:20   [1292]16:20   [1293]16:20

   Luke

   [1294]1:1-4   [1295]1:4   [1296]1:19   [1297]1:20   [1298]1:34-37
   [1299]1:35   [1300]1:35   [1301]1:35   [1302]1:37   [1303]1:55
   [1304]1:68   [1305]1:70   [1306]1:74   [1307]1:75   [1308]1:75
   [1309]1:78   [1310]2:9   [1311]2:10   [1312]2:25   [1313]2:34
   [1314]3:8   [1315]3:16   [1316]3:22   [1317]3:22   [1318]3:38
   [1319]4   [1320]4:5   [1321]4:6   [1322]4:21   [1323]6:13
   [1324]7:30   [1325]7:30   [1326]7:30   [1327]7:30   [1328]7:30
   [1329]7:30   [1330]9:54   [1331]9:55   [1332]10:16   [1333]10:42
   [1334]11:1-13   [1335]11:13   [1336]11:20   [1337]11:20   [1338]12:10
   [1339]12:28   [1340]12:45   [1341]13:3   [1342]13:5   [1343]13:6
   [1344]13:6-9   [1345]13:7   [1346]14:26   [1347]14:26   [1348]16:9
   [1349]16:15   [1350]16:16   [1351]16:22   [1352]16:23
   [1353]16:27-30   [1354]16:27-31   [1355]16:28   [1356]16:29
   [1357]16:29   [1358]16:30   [1359]16:31   [1360]16:31   [1361]17:10
   [1362]18   [1363]18:14   [1364]18:14   [1365]18:27   [1366]19:9
   [1367]19:26   [1368]19:26   [1369]19:26   [1370]20:36   [1371]23:43
   [1372]24   [1373]24:21-25   [1374]24:26   [1375]24:27   [1376]24:27
   [1377]24:27   [1378]24:27   [1379]24:27   [1380]24:39   [1381]24:44
   [1382]24:44   [1383]24:45   [1384]24:47   [1385]24:47

   John

   [1386]1   [1387]1:1   [1388]1:1   [1389]1:1   [1390]1:1   [1391]1:1
   [1392]1:2   [1393]1:3   [1394]1:3   [1395]1:6   [1396]1:6-8
   [1397]1:7   [1398]1:9   [1399]1:12   [1400]1:12   [1401]1:12
   [1402]1:12   [1403]1:12   [1404]1:13-15   [1405]1:14   [1406]1:14
   [1407]1:16   [1408]1:16   [1409]1:16   [1410]1:17   [1411]1:17
   [1412]1:17   [1413]1:18   [1414]1:18   [1415]1:18   [1416]1:18
   [1417]1:18   [1418]1:18   [1419]1:18   [1420]1:26   [1421]1:29
   [1422]2:11   [1423]3   [1424]3   [1425]3:2   [1426]3:2   [1427]3:2
   [1428]3:5   [1429]3:8   [1430]3:10   [1431]3:15   [1432]3:16
   [1433]3:16   [1434]3:16   [1435]3:16   [1436]3:16   [1437]3:16
   [1438]3:16   [1439]3:18   [1440]3:19   [1441]3:20   [1442]3:29
   [1443]3:29   [1444]3:32   [1445]3:33   [1446]3:34   [1447]3:34
   [1448]3:35   [1449]3:35   [1450]3:36   [1451]3:36   [1452]3:36
   [1453]4:9   [1454]4:21   [1455]4:21-23   [1456]4:22   [1457]4:23
   [1458]4:23   [1459]4:24   [1460]4:24   [1461]4:24   [1462]4:25
   [1463]4:25   [1464]4:38   [1465]4:39   [1466]4:42   [1467]5   [1468]5
   [1469]5   [1470]5:17   [1471]5:17   [1472]5:17   [1473]5:17
   [1474]5:21   [1475]5:22   [1476]5:23   [1477]5:23   [1478]5:23
   [1479]5:24   [1480]5:25   [1481]5:26   [1482]5:26   [1483]5:27
   [1484]5:27   [1485]5:32-36   [1486]5:33-36   [1487]5:34
   [1488]5:34-36   [1489]5:36   [1490]5:36   [1491]5:36   [1492]5:37
   [1493]5:39   [1494]5:39   [1495]5:39   [1496]5:39   [1497]5:46
   [1498]5:46   [1499]6   [1500]6   [1501]6:39   [1502]6:39   [1503]6:40
   [1504]6:40   [1505]6:40   [1506]6:44   [1507]6:44   [1508]6:44
   [1509]6:45   [1510]6:51   [1511]6:51   [1512]6:51   [1513]6:51
   [1514]6:53   [1515]6:57   [1516]6:57   [1517]6:57   [1518]6:67
   [1519]7:17   [1520]7:30   [1521]7:38   [1522]7:39   [1523]8
   [1524]8:17   [1525]8:24   [1526]8:24   [1527]8:24   [1528]8:24
   [1529]8:24   [1530]8:36   [1531]8:36   [1532]8:44   [1533]8:54
   [1534]8:56   [1535]8:56   [1536]8:59   [1537]8:59   [1538]9
   [1539]9:31   [1540]9:41   [1541]10:30   [1542]10:35   [1543]10:37
   [1544]10:38   [1545]11   [1546]11:41   [1547]12:31   [1548]12:37
   [1549]12:37   [1550]12:37-40   [1551]13:35   [1552]14   [1553]14:2
   [1554]14:6   [1555]14:9   [1556]14:16   [1557]14:16   [1558]14:16
   [1559]14:21   [1560]14:23   [1561]14:23   [1562]14:23   [1563]14:26
   [1564]14:26   [1565]14:27   [1566]14:30   [1567]15   [1568]15:5
   [1569]15:15   [1570]15:19   [1571]15:22   [1572]15:24   [1573]15:26
   [1574]15:26   [1575]15:26   [1576]15:26   [1577]15:26   [1578]15:27
   [1579]16:2   [1580]16:2   [1581]16:7   [1582]16:7   [1583]16:8
   [1584]16:8   [1585]16:8-15   [1586]16:13   [1587]16:13   [1588]16:14
   [1589]17   [1590]17   [1591]17:1   [1592]17:2   [1593]17:2
   [1594]17:2   [1595]17:2   [1596]17:2   [1597]17:2   [1598]17:3
   [1599]17:3   [1600]17:3   [1601]17:4   [1602]17:6   [1603]17:8
   [1604]17:8   [1605]17:8   [1606]17:10   [1607]17:11   [1608]17:12
   [1609]17:15-17   [1610]17:17-20   [1611]17:21   [1612]17:22-24
   [1613]17:24   [1614]17:24   [1615]17:34   [1616]18:6   [1617]18:6
   [1618]18:6   [1619]18:36   [1620]18:36   [1621]18:37   [1622]18:37
   [1623]19:6   [1624]19:10   [1625]19:10   [1626]19:10   [1627]19:11
   [1628]19:11   [1629]19:11   [1630]20:22   [1631]20:29   [1632]20:31
   [1633]20:31   [1634]20:31   [1635]20:31   [1636]21:17   [1637]21:19
   [1638]21:19   [1639]67

   Acts

   [1640]1:25   [1641]2:10   [1642]2:16   [1643]2:17   [1644]2:17
   [1645]2:24   [1646]2:28   [1647]2:33   [1648]2:33   [1649]2:33
   [1650]2:33   [1651]2:33   [1652]2:37   [1653]2:41   [1654]2:41
   [1655]2:47   [1656]3:19   [1657]3:20   [1658]3:23   [1659]3:25
   [1660]4:12   [1661]4:12   [1662]4:12   [1663]4:24-27   [1664]4:27
   [1665]4:29   [1666]4:30   [1667]4:30   [1668]4:31   [1669]5:4
   [1670]5:31   [1671]5:31   [1672]5:41   [1673]5:41   [1674]7
   [1675]7:3   [1676]7:4   [1677]7:41   [1678]7:41   [1679]7:41
   [1680]7:51   [1681]7:51   [1682]7:51   [1683]8:1   [1684]8:4
   [1685]9   [1686]9   [1687]9:2   [1688]9:2   [1689]9:4   [1690]9:5
   [1691]9:15   [1692]9:16   [1693]10:31   [1694]10:48   [1695]11:18
   [1696]13   [1697]13   [1698]13   [1699]13:1   [1700]13:2   [1701]13:2
   [1702]13:2   [1703]13:6   [1704]13:26   [1705]13:32   [1706]13:33
   [1707]13:38   [1708]13:39   [1709]13:39   [1710]13:39   [1711]13:46
   [1712]13:46   [1713]13:46   [1714]14:16   [1715]14:16   [1716]14:16
   [1717]14:16   [1718]14:16   [1719]14:17   [1720]14:17   [1721]15
   [1722]15:10   [1723]15:10   [1724]15:10   [1725]15:18   [1726]15:18
   [1727]15:18   [1728]15:18   [1729]15:18   [1730]15:28   [1731]15:28
   [1732]15:28   [1733]16:3   [1734]16:3   [1735]16:14   [1736]16:14
   [1737]16:14   [1738]16:16   [1739]16:17   [1740]16:17   [1741]17
   [1742]17   [1743]17   [1744]17   [1745]17:11   [1746]17:11
   [1747]17:25   [1748]17:25   [1749]17:26   [1750]17:26   [1751]17:27
   [1752]17:27   [1753]17:28   [1754]17:28   [1755]17:28   [1756]17:28
   [1757]17:28   [1758]17:28   [1759]17:29   [1760]17:29   [1761]17:29
   [1762]17:30   [1763]17:30   [1764]17:30   [1765]18:28   [1766]19:9
   [1767]19:10   [1768]20   [1769]20:26   [1770]20:27   [1771]20:27
   [1772]20:27   [1773]20:27   [1774]20:28   [1775]20:28   [1776]20:28
   [1777]20:28   [1778]20:28   [1779]20:28   [1780]20:28   [1781]21
   [1782]21:21-26   [1783]23   [1784]23:3   [1785]23:10   [1786]23:11
   [1787]25:1   [1788]25:10   [1789]26:22   [1790]26:22   [1791]26:22
   [1792]26:23   [1793]26:27   [1794]27:22-25   [1795]27:29
   [1796]27:31   [1797]27:31

   Romans

   [1798]1   [1799]1   [1800]1   [1801]1   [1802]1:1   [1803]1:1
   [1804]1:2   [1805]1:2   [1806]1:2-6   [1807]1:3   [1808]1:5
   [1809]1:5   [1810]1:16   [1811]1:16   [1812]1:16   [1813]1:16
   [1814]1:17   [1815]1:19   [1816]1:20   [1817]1:20   [1818]1:21
   [1819]1:22   [1820]1:23   [1821]1:23   [1822]1:23   [1823]1:23
   [1824]1:24   [1825]1:24   [1826]1:24-28   [1827]1:28   [1828]1:28
   [1829]2   [1830]2   [1831]2   [1832]2   [1833]2:2   [1834]2:4
   [1835]2:4   [1836]2:5   [1837]2:5   [1838]2:7   [1839]2:13
   [1840]2:14   [1841]2:15   [1842]2:16   [1843]2:16   [1844]2:26
   [1845]2:27   [1846]3   [1847]3   [1848]3   [1849]3   [1850]3
   [1851]3   [1852]3   [1853]3   [1854]3:4   [1855]3:4   [1856]3:4
   [1857]3:4   [1858]3:5   [1859]3:10   [1860]3:10-19   [1861]3:11
   [1862]3:13   [1863]3:19   [1864]3:20   [1865]3:20   [1866]3:20
   [1867]3:24   [1868]3:24-25   [1869]3:24-26   [1870]3:24-26
   [1871]3:25   [1872]3:25   [1873]3:27   [1874]3:27   [1875]3:27
   [1876]3:27   [1877]3:27   [1878]3:28   [1879]4   [1880]4   [1881]4
   [1882]4   [1883]4   [1884]4   [1885]4   [1886]4   [1887]4:2
   [1888]4:2-11   [1889]4:3   [1890]4:4   [1891]4:4   [1892]4:4
   [1893]4:4   [1894]4:4   [1895]4:4   [1896]4:4   [1897]4:5   [1898]4:5
   [1899]4:13   [1900]4:13   [1901]4:14   [1902]4:15   [1903]4:15
   [1904]4:17   [1905]4:19-21   [1906]4:20   [1907]4:21   [1908]4:25
   [1909]5   [1910]5   [1911]5:2   [1912]5:3   [1913]5:4   [1914]5:6-21
   [1915]5:8   [1916]5:8   [1917]5:9   [1918]5:12   [1919]5:12
   [1920]5:12   [1921]5:12   [1922]5:14   [1923]5:15   [1924]5:15-18
   [1925]5:16   [1926]5:18   [1927]5:18   [1928]5:19   [1929]5:19
   [1930]5:19   [1931]5:19   [1932]5:20   [1933]6   [1934]6   [1935]6:5
   [1936]6:6   [1937]6:6   [1938]6:6   [1939]6:7   [1940]6:9
   [1941]6:10   [1942]6:10-23   [1943]6:12-14   [1944]6:13   [1945]6:14
   [1946]6:16   [1947]6:17   [1948]6:18   [1949]6:18-22   [1950]6:19
   [1951]6:20   [1952]6:22   [1953]6:23   [1954]6:23   [1955]6:23
   [1956]6:23   [1957]7   [1958]7   [1959]7   [1960]7   [1961]7
   [1962]7:2   [1963]7:3   [1964]7:4-8   [1965]7:5   [1966]7:6
   [1967]7:7   [1968]7:7   [1969]7:8   [1970]7:10   [1971]7:11
   [1972]7:12   [1973]7:13   [1974]8:1   [1975]8:2   [1976]8:3
   [1977]8:3   [1978]8:3   [1979]8:5   [1980]8:7   [1981]8:7   [1982]8:9
   [1983]8:9   [1984]8:9-11   [1985]8:9-11   [1986]8:9-12   [1987]8:10
   [1988]8:11   [1989]8:11   [1990]8:12   [1991]8:13   [1992]8:14
   [1993]8:14   [1994]8:15   [1995]8:15   [1996]8:15   [1997]8:15
   [1998]8:15   [1999]8:15   [2000]8:15   [2001]8:15-23   [2002]8:16
   [2003]8:16   [2004]8:16   [2005]8:16   [2006]8:16   [2007]8:26
   [2008]8:28-30   [2009]8:28-30   [2010]8:28-30   [2011]8:29
   [2012]8:29   [2013]8:29   [2014]8:29   [2015]8:30   [2016]8:30
   [2017]8:32   [2018]8:34   [2019]8:34   [2020]8:34   [2021]8:34
   [2022]8:34   [2023]9   [2024]9   [2025]9   [2026]9   [2027]9
   [2028]9:1   [2029]9:4   [2030]9:4   [2031]9:4   [2032]9:5   [2033]9:5
   [2034]9:6   [2035]9:7   [2036]9:8   [2037]9:11   [2038]9:11
   [2039]9:11   [2040]9:11   [2041]9:11   [2042]9:17   [2043]9:17
   [2044]9:19   [2045]9:19   [2046]9:21-26   [2047]9:22   [2048]9:22
   [2049]9:23   [2050]9:30-32   [2051]9:32   [2052]9:33   [2053]10
   [2054]10   [2055]10   [2056]10:3-6   [2057]10:4   [2058]10:4
   [2059]10:4-10   [2060]10:5   [2061]10:5   [2062]10:5   [2063]10:5
   [2064]10:7   [2065]10:8   [2066]10:8-10   [2067]10:8-10   [2068]10:9
   [2069]10:9   [2070]10:9   [2071]10:10   [2072]10:10   [2073]10:10
   [2074]10:10   [2075]10:12-18   [2076]10:13   [2077]10:13-15
   [2078]10:14   [2079]10:14-17   [2080]10:14-17   [2081]10:14-17
   [2082]10:15   [2083]10:17   [2084]10:17   [2085]10:17
   [2086]10:17-21   [2087]10:20   [2088]10:21   [2089]11   [2090]11
   [2091]11:1   [2092]11:5   [2093]11:17-24   [2094]11:25
   [2095]11:29-33   [2096]11:32   [2097]11:33   [2098]11:33
   [2099]11:33   [2100]11:33   [2101]11:33   [2102]11:34   [2103]11:34
   [2104]11:34-36   [2105]11:35   [2106]11:35   [2107]11:35
   [2108]11:35   [2109]11:35   [2110]11:36   [2111]11:36   [2112]11:36
   [2113]11:36   [2114]11:36   [2115]11:36   [2116]11:36   [2117]12
   [2118]12   [2119]12   [2120]12:1   [2121]12:1   [2122]12:2
   [2123]12:3   [2124]12:3   [2125]12:4   [2126]12:4   [2127]12:4
   [2128]12:4-8   [2129]12:5   [2130]12:5   [2131]12:8   [2132]12:9
   [2133]12:11   [2134]12:12   [2135]13   [2136]13   [2137]13
   [2138]13:1   [2139]13:1   [2140]13:1   [2141]13:1   [2142]13:1
   [2143]13:1-3   [2144]13:2   [2145]13:4   [2146]13:4   [2147]13:5
   [2148]13:5   [2149]13:6   [2150]14   [2151]14:3   [2152]14:5
   [2153]14:10   [2154]14:14   [2155]14:15   [2156]14:15   [2157]14:21
   [2158]15:4   [2159]15:4   [2160]15:19   [2161]16:5   [2162]16:17
   [2163]16:25   [2164]16:25   [2165]16:26

   1 Corinthians

   [2166]1   [2167]1   [2168]1:5-9   [2169]1:6-8   [2170]1:9   [2171]1:9
   [2172]1:17   [2173]1:18   [2174]1:18   [2175]1:18   [2176]1:18
   [2177]1:20   [2178]1:20-24   [2179]1:21   [2180]1:21   [2181]1:21
   [2182]1:21-23   [2183]1:23   [2184]1:23   [2185]1:24   [2186]1:24
   [2187]1:24   [2188]1:24   [2189]1:24   [2190]1:24   [2191]1:25
   [2192]1:27   [2193]1:28   [2194]1:29   [2195]1:30   [2196]1:30
   [2197]1:30   [2198]1:31   [2199]1:31   [2200]2   [2201]2   [2202]2
   [2203]2:2   [2204]2:2   [2205]2:6-8   [2206]2:6-15   [2207]2:7
   [2208]2:7   [2209]2:7   [2210]2:7   [2211]2:8   [2212]2:8   [2213]2:8
   [2214]2:9   [2215]2:9   [2216]2:10   [2217]2:10   [2218]2:10
   [2219]2:10   [2220]2:10   [2221]2:10   [2222]2:10   [2223]2:10
   [2224]2:10-16   [2225]2:11   [2226]2:11   [2227]2:11   [2228]2:11
   [2229]2:11   [2230]2:11   [2231]2:11   [2232]2:12   [2233]2:12
   [2234]2:12   [2235]2:12   [2236]2:13   [2237]2:13   [2238]2:14
   [2239]2:14   [2240]2:15   [2241]2:16   [2242]2:18   [2243]3   [2244]3
   [2245]3:3-6   [2246]3:5   [2247]3:5   [2248]3:5   [2249]3:5-12
   [2250]3:5-23   [2251]3:6   [2252]3:6   [2253]3:7   [2254]3:7-10
   [2255]3:9   [2256]3:9   [2257]3:10   [2258]3:10   [2259]3:10
   [2260]3:18   [2261]4:3   [2262]4:4   [2263]4:6   [2264]4:6
   [2265]4:6   [2266]4:7   [2267]5:7   [2268]5:9   [2269]6:9-11
   [2270]6:17   [2271]6:19   [2272]6:19   [2273]6:20   [2274]7:19
   [2275]7:28   [2276]8   [2277]8   [2278]8:4   [2279]8:4-6   [2280]8:6
   [2281]9   [2282]9   [2283]9:19   [2284]9:20   [2285]10   [2286]10:7
   [2287]10:9   [2288]10:13   [2289]10:13   [2290]10:16   [2291]10:16
   [2292]10:16   [2293]10:17   [2294]10:17   [2295]10:17   [2296]10:19
   [2297]10:20   [2298]10:20   [2299]10:20   [2300]10:27-33
   [2301]10:31   [2302]11   [2303]11:23   [2304]11:25   [2305]11:30-32
   [2306]11:32   [2307]11:32   [2308]11:32   [2309]11:34   [2310]11:34
   [2311]12   [2312]12   [2313]12:3   [2314]12:3   [2315]12:3
   [2316]12:4   [2317]12:4   [2318]12:4   [2319]12:4   [2320]12:5
   [2321]12:6-31   [2322]12:7   [2323]12:9   [2324]12:11   [2325]12:11
   [2326]12:11   [2327]12:12   [2328]12:12   [2329]12:12
   [2330]12:12-27   [2331]12:13   [2332]12:13   [2333]12:13
   [2334]12:17   [2335]12:28   [2336]12:28-30   [2337]13:1   [2338]13:9
   [2339]13:9   [2340]13:10   [2341]13:11   [2342]13:12   [2343]13:12
   [2344]13:12   [2345]14:5   [2346]14:26   [2347]14:32   [2348]14:32
   [2349]14:33   [2350]14:33   [2351]14:33   [2352]14:33   [2353]14:33
   [2354]14:40   [2355]14:40   [2356]15:1   [2357]15:1-4   [2358]15:2
   [2359]15:10   [2360]15:10   [2361]15:20   [2362]15:21   [2363]15:21
   [2364]15:24   [2365]15:24   [2366]15:24   [2367]15:27   [2368]15:28
   [2369]15:28   [2370]15:28   [2371]15:32   [2372]15:49   [2373]15:55
   [2374]15:56   [2375]16:1   [2376]16:2   [2377]16:19

   2 Corinthians

   [2378]1:2   [2379]1:19   [2380]1:20-22   [2381]1:21   [2382]1:22
   [2383]1:22   [2384]1:22   [2385]1:22   [2386]2:4   [2387]2:5
   [2388]2:14-16   [2389]2:16   [2390]2:17   [2391]3   [2392]3
   [2393]3:3   [2394]3:3   [2395]3:3-6   [2396]3:4   [2397]3:5
   [2398]3:6   [2399]3:6   [2400]3:6   [2401]3:6-11   [2402]3:7-9
   [2403]3:8   [2404]3:9   [2405]3:9   [2406]3:10   [2407]3:10
   [2408]3:11   [2409]3:11   [2410]3:12   [2411]3:13   [2412]3:13
   [2413]3:16-18   [2414]3:17   [2415]3:17   [2416]3:17   [2417]3:18
   [2418]3:18   [2419]3:18   [2420]3:18   [2421]3:18   [2422]3:18
   [2423]4   [2424]4   [2425]4:2   [2426]4:3   [2427]4:3   [2428]4:4
   [2429]4:4   [2430]4:4   [2431]4:4   [2432]4:4   [2433]4:4   [2434]4:4
   [2435]4:6   [2436]4:6   [2437]4:6   [2438]4:8   [2439]4:9
   [2440]4:13   [2441]4:13   [2442]4:13   [2443]4:16   [2444]4:16
   [2445]4:16   [2446]5:6   [2447]5:7   [2448]5:11   [2449]5:17
   [2450]5:17-21   [2451]5:19   [2452]5:19   [2453]5:19   [2454]5:19
   [2455]5:19   [2456]5:19   [2457]5:19   [2458]5:19   [2459]5:21
   [2460]5:21   [2461]5:21   [2462]5:21   [2463]6:1   [2464]6:2
   [2465]6:7   [2466]7:10   [2467]9:8   [2468]10:5   [2469]10:5
   [2470]10:6   [2471]11:2   [2472]11:3   [2473]11:3   [2474]11:15
   [2475]12   [2476]12:11   [2477]12:12   [2478]12:12   [2479]13
   [2480]13:3   [2481]13:10   [2482]13:13   [2483]13:14

   Galatians

   [2484]1:1   [2485]1:1   [2486]1:1   [2487]1:4   [2488]1:6   [2489]1:7
   [2490]1:7-9   [2491]1:7-9   [2492]1:8   [2493]1:8   [2494]1:8
   [2495]1:9   [2496]1:9   [2497]1:12   [2498]1:13   [2499]1:13-15
   [2500]2   [2501]2   [2502]2:3   [2503]2:7-9   [2504]2:9   [2505]2:11
   [2506]2:12   [2507]2:15   [2508]2:15   [2509]2:16   [2510]2:16
   [2511]2:16   [2512]2:16   [2513]2:16   [2514]2:16   [2515]2:16
   [2516]2:17   [2517]2:17   [2518]2:17   [2519]2:20   [2520]2:20
   [2521]2:20   [2522]2:20   [2523]2:20   [2524]2:21   [2525]2:30
   [2526]3   [2527]3   [2528]3   [2529]3:1-3   [2530]3:1-3   [2531]3:2
   [2532]3:5   [2533]3:6   [2534]3:7   [2535]3:8   [2536]3:8   [2537]3:8
   [2538]3:9   [2539]3:10   [2540]3:10-13   [2541]3:13   [2542]3:13
   [2543]3:15   [2544]3:15   [2545]3:16   [2546]3:16   [2547]3:16
   [2548]3:16-18   [2549]3:17   [2550]3:17   [2551]3:17-19   [2552]3:18
   [2553]3:19   [2554]3:19   [2555]3:19   [2556]3:19   [2557]3:19-24
   [2558]3:21   [2559]3:21   [2560]3:21   [2561]3:21-24   [2562]3:22
   [2563]3:22   [2564]3:23   [2565]3:24   [2566]3:24   [2567]3:25
   [2568]3:26   [2569]3:26   [2570]4   [2571]4   [2572]4:1   [2573]4:1-3
   [2574]4:1-3   [2575]4:1-3   [2576]4:1-4   [2577]4:1-4   [2578]4:1-5
   [2579]4:1-5   [2580]4:2   [2581]4:3   [2582]4:4-7   [2583]4:5
   [2584]4:5   [2585]4:5   [2586]4:6   [2587]4:6   [2588]4:6   [2589]4:6
   [2590]4:6   [2591]4:6   [2592]4:6   [2593]4:6   [2594]4:6   [2595]4:7
   [2596]4:8   [2597]4:8   [2598]4:8   [2599]4:9   [2600]4:9
   [2601]4:10   [2602]4:16   [2603]4:18   [2604]4:19   [2605]4:19
   [2606]4:23   [2607]4:24   [2608]4:24   [2609]4:24-31   [2610]4:25
   [2611]4:26   [2612]4:26   [2613]4:26-28   [2614]4:28   [2615]4:31
   [2616]5   [2617]5   [2618]5:1   [2619]5:13   [2620]5:13   [2621]5:17
   [2622]5:17   [2623]5:17   [2624]5:19-21   [2625]5:19-25   [2626]6
   [2627]6:16   [2628]6:16

   Ephesians

   [2629]1   [2630]1   [2631]1   [2632]1:3   [2633]1:3   [2634]1:3
   [2635]1:3   [2636]1:3   [2637]1:4   [2638]1:4   [2639]1:4   [2640]1:4
   [2641]1:5   [2642]1:5   [2643]1:5   [2644]1:5   [2645]1:5-9
   [2646]1:6   [2647]1:6   [2648]1:6   [2649]1:6   [2650]1:7   [2651]1:8
   [2652]1:11   [2653]1:12   [2654]1:13   [2655]1:13   [2656]1:13
   [2657]1:14   [2658]1:14   [2659]1:14   [2660]1:14   [2661]1:14
   [2662]1:14   [2663]1:14   [2664]1:17   [2665]1:17-21   [2666]1:18
   [2667]1:21   [2668]1:21   [2669]1:21   [2670]1:22   [2671]1:22
   [2672]1:22   [2673]1:22   [2674]1:22   [2675]1:22   [2676]1:23
   [2677]1:23   [2678]1:23   [2679]2:1-6   [2680]2:2   [2681]2:2
   [2682]2:2-7   [2683]2:3   [2684]2:6   [2685]2:8   [2686]2:9
   [2687]2:10   [2688]2:10   [2689]2:11   [2690]2:11   [2691]2:11-13
   [2692]2:11-16   [2693]2:12   [2694]2:12   [2695]2:12   [2696]2:12
   [2697]2:12   [2698]2:12-15   [2699]2:13   [2700]2:13-15   [2701]2:14
   [2702]2:15   [2703]2:16   [2704]2:16   [2705]2:17   [2706]2:17
   [2707]2:17   [2708]2:18   [2709]2:19-22   [2710]2:20   [2711]2:20
   [2712]2:20   [2713]2:20   [2714]2:20   [2715]2:20   [2716]2:20-22
   [2717]2:20-22   [2718]2:21   [2719]2:21   [2720]3   [2721]3:1-11
   [2722]3:1-11   [2723]3:4   [2724]3:5   [2725]3:6   [2726]3:8
   [2727]3:8   [2728]3:9-11   [2729]3:10   [2730]3:12   [2731]3:14
   [2732]3:16   [2733]3:16   [2734]3:16   [2735]3:17   [2736]3:17
   [2737]3:17   [2738]3:17   [2739]3:17   [2740]3:18   [2741]3:20
   [2742]4   [2743]4   [2744]4   [2745]4   [2746]4:3   [2747]4:3
   [2748]4:3   [2749]4:3-6   [2750]4:4   [2751]4:4-6   [2752]4:5
   [2753]4:6   [2754]4:6   [2755]4:7   [2756]4:7   [2757]4:8
   [2758]4:11   [2759]4:11   [2760]4:11   [2761]4:11   [2762]4:11
   [2763]4:11   [2764]4:11-13   [2765]4:12   [2766]4:12   [2767]4:13
   [2768]4:13   [2769]4:14   [2770]4:15   [2771]4:15   [2772]4:17
   [2773]4:17   [2774]4:17-20   [2775]4:18   [2776]4:18   [2777]4:18
   [2778]4:19   [2779]4:22   [2780]4:24   [2781]4:24   [2782]4:24
   [2783]4:24   [2784]4:27   [2785]4:27   [2786]4:30   [2787]5   [2788]5
   [2789]5   [2790]5   [2791]5   [2792]5:5   [2793]5:8   [2794]5:8
   [2795]5:14   [2796]5:23   [2797]5:23   [2798]5:23   [2799]5:23
   [2800]5:24   [2801]5:25   [2802]5:25   [2803]5:25   [2804]5:25-27
   [2805]5:30   [2806]5:30   [2807]5:31   [2808]5:32   [2809]6
   [2810]6:5   [2811]6:6   [2812]6:11   [2813]6:11-13   [2814]6:12
   [2815]6:12   [2816]6:14

   Philippians

   [2817]1:6   [2818]1:6   [2819]1:11   [2820]1:12   [2821]1:13
   [2822]1:21   [2823]1:23   [2824]1:23   [2825]1:29   [2826]2:2
   [2827]2:6   [2828]2:6-8   [2829]2:6-10   [2830]2:7   [2831]2:12
   [2832]2:12   [2833]2:13   [2834]3:8   [2835]3:8   [2836]3:10
   [2837]3:15   [2838]3:16   [2839]3:19   [2840]3:20   [2841]3:21
   [2842]3:21   [2843]3:21   [2844]3:21   [2845]3:21   [2846]3:21

   Colossians

   [2847]1:6   [2848]1:8   [2849]1:12   [2850]1:13   [2851]1:13
   [2852]1:13   [2853]1:13   [2854]1:15   [2855]1:15   [2856]1:16
   [2857]1:18   [2858]1:18   [2859]1:19   [2860]1:19   [2861]1:19
   [2862]1:24   [2863]1:25   [2864]2:2   [2865]2:3   [2866]2:3
   [2867]2:8   [2868]2:9   [2869]2:10   [2870]2:11   [2871]2:11
   [2872]2:12   [2873]2:14   [2874]2:14   [2875]2:14   [2876]2:14
   [2877]2:14   [2878]2:14   [2879]2:14   [2880]2:14   [2881]2:14
   [2882]2:16   [2883]2:16   [2884]2:17   [2885]2:17   [2886]2:17
   [2887]2:17   [2888]2:17   [2889]2:18   [2890]2:18-23   [2891]2:19
   [2892]2:20   [2893]2:21   [2894]3:4   [2895]3:5   [2896]3:5
   [2897]3:9   [2898]3:10   [2899]3:10   [2900]3:10   [2901]3:10
   [2902]4:16

   1 Thessalonians

   [2903]1:3   [2904]1:3   [2905]1:9   [2906]2:4   [2907]2:12
   [2908]2:13   [2909]4:3   [2910]5:9   [2911]5:23   [2912]5:24

   2 Thessalonians

   [2913]1:6   [2914]1:8   [2915]1:9   [2916]1:9   [2917]2   [2918]2:2-4
   [2919]2:3-8   [2920]2:3-8   [2921]2:9   [2922]2:9-11   [2923]2:9-11
   [2924]2:10   [2925]2:11   [2926]2:11   [2927]2:12   [2928]2:13
   [2929]2:13   [2930]2:13-14   [2931]2:14   [2932]2:14   [2933]2:14
   [2934]3:1   [2935]3:2   [2936]3:2   [2937]3:6   [2938]9

   1 Timothy

   [2939]1:9   [2940]1:9   [2941]1:10   [2942]1:10   [2943]1:11
   [2944]1:11   [2945]1:13   [2946]1:15   [2947]1:15   [2948]1:17
   [2949]1:17   [2950]1:19   [2951]2:1   [2952]2:1-4   [2953]2:2
   [2954]2:2   [2955]2:2   [2956]2:2   [2957]2:4   [2958]2:5   [2959]2:6
   [2960]2:6   [2961]3   [2962]3:6   [2963]3:15   [2964]3:15
   [2965]3:15   [2966]3:15   [2967]3:15   [2968]3:16   [2969]3:16
   [2970]3:16   [2971]3:16   [2972]4:6   [2973]4:13   [2974]5:21
   [2975]5:29   [2976]6   [2977]6   [2978]6:3   [2979]6:4   [2980]6:10
   [2981]6:15   [2982]6:15   [2983]6:16   [2984]6:16   [2985]6:16
   [2986]6:16

   2 Timothy

   [2987]1:9   [2988]1:9   [2989]1:9   [2990]1:9   [2991]1:9   [2992]1:9
   [2993]1:9   [2994]1:10   [2995]1:10   [2996]1:10   [2997]2:13
   [2998]2:13   [2999]2:13   [3000]2:15   [3001]2:17   [3002]2:19
   [3003]2:19   [3004]2:26   [3005]3:12   [3006]3:15   [3007]3:15-17
   [3008]3:15-17   [3009]3:16   [3010]3:16   [3011]3:16   [3012]3:16
   [3013]3:17   [3014]4:3-5   [3015]4:7   [3016]4:8

   Titus

   [3017]1   [3018]1:1   [3019]1:1   [3020]1:2   [3021]1:2   [3022]1:7
   [3023]1:9   [3024]1:9   [3025]1:16   [3026]2:11   [3027]2:11
   [3028]2:12   [3029]2:12   [3030]2:12   [3031]2:13   [3032]3:1
   [3033]3:3   [3034]3:3-7   [3035]3:4   [3036]3:5   [3037]3:7
   [3038]3:8   [3039]3:8   [3040]3:8   [3041]3:8   [3042]3:14

   Hebrews

   [3043]1:1   [3044]1:2   [3045]1:2   [3046]1:2   [3047]1:2   [3048]1:3
   [3049]1:3   [3050]1:3   [3051]1:3   [3052]1:3   [3053]1:6   [3054]1:8
   [3055]1:9   [3056]1:10-12   [3057]1:11   [3058]1:12   [3059]1:14
   [3060]1:14   [3061]1:14   [3062]2   [3063]2   [3064]2:2   [3065]2:2
   [3066]2:2   [3067]2:2-5   [3068]2:3   [3069]2:3   [3070]2:3
   [3071]2:3   [3072]2:3   [3073]2:4   [3074]2:4   [3075]2:4   [3076]2:5
   [3077]2:5   [3078]2:10   [3079]2:10   [3080]2:10   [3081]2:14
   [3082]2:14   [3083]2:15   [3084]3:5   [3085]3:6   [3086]3:6
   [3087]3:6   [3088]3:7   [3089]3:7   [3090]3:7   [3091]3:8   [3092]3:8
   [3093]3:11   [3094]3:11   [3095]3:12   [3096]3:17   [3097]3:18
   [3098]3:19   [3099]4   [3100]4:12   [3101]4:13   [3102]4:13
   [3103]4:13   [3104]4:14-16   [3105]4:15   [3106]4:16   [3107]4:16
   [3108]5   [3109]5   [3110]5   [3111]5:1   [3112]5:1   [3113]5:1
   [3114]5:3   [3115]5:5   [3116]5:6   [3117]5:7   [3118]5:8   [3119]5:8
   [3120]5:9   [3121]5:9   [3122]5:9   [3123]5:9   [3124]5:9
   [3125]5:20   [3126]6:2   [3127]6:10   [3128]6:10   [3129]6:10
   [3130]6:11   [3131]6:13   [3132]6:14   [3133]6:17   [3134]6:17
   [3135]6:18   [3136]6:18   [3137]6:18   [3138]6:18   [3139]6:19
   [3140]7   [3141]7   [3142]7:2   [3143]7:16   [3144]7:16
   [3145]7:16-20   [3146]7:18   [3147]7:19   [3148]7:20   [3149]7:21
   [3150]7:22   [3151]7:24   [3152]7:26   [3153]7:26   [3154]7:28
   [3155]8   [3156]8:1-6   [3157]8:5   [3158]8:5   [3159]8:6   [3160]8:6
   [3161]8:6   [3162]8:8   [3163]8:9   [3164]8:10   [3165]8:11
   [3166]8:12   [3167]8:13   [3168]8:13   [3169]9   [3170]9:2
   [3171]9:3   [3172]9:5   [3173]9:7   [3174]9:8   [3175]9:8-10
   [3176]9:8-12   [3177]9:9   [3178]9:9   [3179]9:10   [3180]9:10
   [3181]9:10   [3182]9:10   [3183]9:11   [3184]9:11   [3185]9:12
   [3186]9:12   [3187]9:12   [3188]9:14   [3189]9:14   [3190]9:14
   [3191]9:14   [3192]9:15   [3193]9:15   [3194]9:15   [3195]9:15
   [3196]9:15   [3197]9:16   [3198]9:18-20   [3199]9:22   [3200]9:24
   [3201]10   [3202]10   [3203]10   [3204]10   [3205]10:1   [3206]10:1
   [3207]10:1   [3208]10:1   [3209]10:1   [3210]10:1   [3211]10:3
   [3212]10:4   [3213]10:5   [3214]10:5   [3215]10:6-9   [3216]10:9
   [3217]10:10   [3218]10:10   [3219]10:14   [3220]10:19   [3221]10:20
   [3222]10:20   [3223]10:20   [3224]10:21   [3225]10:21   [3226]10:21
   [3227]10:22   [3228]10:22   [3229]10:22   [3230]10:27   [3231]10:29
   [3232]10:29   [3233]10:29   [3234]11   [3235]11   [3236]11:3
   [3237]11:6   [3238]11:7   [3239]11:8   [3240]11:13   [3241]11:24-26
   [3242]11:32   [3243]11:33   [3244]11:40   [3245]11:40   [3246]12
   [3247]12   [3248]12:1   [3249]12:1-4   [3250]12:2   [3251]12:9
   [3252]12:15   [3253]12:18-21   [3254]12:18-24   [3255]12:18-24
   [3256]12:22   [3257]12:22   [3258]12:22   [3259]12:22   [3260]12:23
   [3261]12:24   [3262]12:29   [3263]13:8   [3264]13:8   [3265]13:8
   [3266]13:8   [3267]13:8-9   [3268]13:9   [3269]13:15   [3270]13:17

   James

   [3271]1:1   [3272]1:13   [3273]1:17   [3274]1:17   [3275]1:17
   [3276]1:17   [3277]1:17   [3278]1:17   [3279]1:17   [3280]1:17
   [3281]1:17   [3282]1:18   [3283]1:21   [3284]2   [3285]2:8
   [3286]2:8   [3287]2:10   [3288]2:13   [3289]2:14-26   [3290]2:19
   [3291]3:9   [3292]4:6   [3293]4:7   [3294]4:12

   1 Peter

   [3295]1:1   [3296]1:1   [3297]1:2   [3298]1:5   [3299]1:5
   [3300]1:10-12   [3301]1:11   [3302]1:12   [3303]1:12   [3304]1:20
   [3305]1:21   [3306]1:22   [3307]1:23   [3308]1:23   [3309]1:23
   [3310]1:23-25   [3311]1:25   [3312]1:25   [3313]2:2-9   [3314]2:4-6
   [3315]2:5   [3316]2:5   [3317]2:5   [3318]2:9   [3319]2:9   [3320]2:9
   [3321]2:9   [3322]2:9   [3323]2:10   [3324]2:13   [3325]2:13
   [3326]2:13   [3327]2:14   [3328]2:16   [3329]2:19   [3330]3:1
   [3331]3:18   [3332]3:19   [3333]3:19   [3334]3:19   [3335]3:19
   [3336]3:22   [3337]4:3   [3338]4:11   [3339]4:17   [3340]5   [3341]5
   [3342]5:1   [3343]5:1   [3344]5:1   [3345]5:4   [3346]5:4   [3347]5:10

   1 John

   [3348]1:1   [3349]1:1   [3350]1:2   [3351]1:2   [3352]1:3   [3353]1:3
   [3354]1:7-10   [3355]2:1   [3356]2:1   [3357]2:2   [3358]2:2
   [3359]2:15   [3360]2:16   [3361]2:16   [3362]2:23   [3363]2:23
   [3364]2:24   [3365]2:24   [3366]2:27   [3367]3:1   [3368]3:2
   [3369]3:2   [3370]3:2   [3371]3:2   [3372]3:4   [3373]3:4   [3374]3:4
   [3375]3:4   [3376]3:7   [3377]3:8   [3378]3:19   [3379]3:23
   [3380]3:24   [3381]4   [3382]4   [3383]4:1   [3384]4:1   [3385]4:2
   [3386]4:4   [3387]4:7   [3388]4:13   [3389]4:14   [3390]5:3
   [3391]5:4   [3392]5:7   [3393]5:7   [3394]5:8   [3395]5:9   [3396]5:9
   [3397]5:9-13   [3398]5:10   [3399]5:13   [3400]5:13   [3401]5:16
   [3402]5:19   [3403]5:21   [3404]5:21

   3 John

   [3405]1:9   [3406]1:10

   Jude

   [3407]1:4

   Revelation

   [3408]1:4   [3409]1:8   [3410]1:8   [3411]1:8   [3412]1:8
   [3413]1:11   [3414]2   [3415]2   [3416]2:3   [3417]2:4   [3418]2:5
   [3419]2:5   [3420]2:7   [3421]2:8   [3422]2:10   [3423]2:10
   [3424]2:13   [3425]2:13   [3426]2:14   [3427]2:17   [3428]2:17
   [3429]2:20   [3430]2:20   [3431]2:21   [3432]2:23   [3433]2:23
   [3434]2:93   [3435]3   [3436]3:2   [3437]3:12   [3438]3:15-18
   [3439]3:20   [3440]3:20   [3441]3:21   [3442]4   [3443]4:8
   [3444]4:8   [3445]4:8-11   [3446]4:11   [3447]4:11   [3448]4:11
   [3449]4:11   [3450]5   [3451]5:8-10   [3452]5:9   [3453]5:11
   [3454]5:13   [3455]6:9   [3456]6:9-11   [3457]7:14   [3458]12
   [3459]12:11   [3460]13:8   [3461]13:15-17   [3462]14   [3463]14:13
   [3464]14:13   [3465]14:13   [3466]15:18-21   [3467]16:9   [3468]17:4
   [3469]17:6   [3470]17:14   [3471]17:14   [3472]18:4   [3473]19
   [3474]19:7   [3475]19:10   [3476]19:16   [3477]19:16   [3478]19:20
   [3479]19:20   [3480]20:15   [3481]21:14   [3482]21:14   [3483]21:14
   [3484]21:14   [3485]21:14   [3486]21:23   [3487]21:23   [3488]21:24
   [3489]22:12   [3490]22:17   [3491]22:20

   Wisdom of Solomon

   [3492]5:7   [3493]8:1   [3494]8:1   [3495]11:24-26

   Sirach

   [3496]3:20-23   [3497]20:21-23   [3498]31:8-10
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v.v-p6.1
   2. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v.vii-p4.7
   3. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v.vii-p6.3
   4. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v.x-p13.1
   5. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v.xi-p6.1
   6. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v.x-p13.2
   7. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v.xi-p6.2
   8. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=9#v.vii-p3.2
   9. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=20#v.x-p19.1
  10. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=20#v.xi-p11.3
  11. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=21#v.x-p19.2
  12. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=21#v.xi-p11.4
  13. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=26#v.viii-p17.2
  14. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=26#v.xii-p5.1
  15. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=26#v.xxvi-p5.5
  16. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=27#v.viii-p9.1
  17. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=27#v.viii-p17.3
  18. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=27#v.xii-p5.2
  19. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=27#v.xix-p4.1
  20. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=31#v.v-p35.1
  21. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=31#v.v-p80.2
  22. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=31#v.v-p82.2
  23. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=31#v.v-p101.2
  24. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=3#v.v-p37.3
  25. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=4#v.viii-p17.8
  26. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=7#v.v-p45.4
  27. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v.xix-p4.3
  28. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.xix-p4.4
  29. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=16#ii.ii-p5.1
  30. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=16#v.viii-p6.3
  31. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=16#v.viii-p13.1
  32. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=16#v.viii-p17.6
  33. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=16#v.xi-p3.5
  34. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=16#v.xi-p16.4
  35. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=16#v.xvii-p1.6
  36. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=17#ii.ii-p5.2
  37. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=17#iii.ii.iii-p25.1
  38. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=17#v.xiv-p2.1
  39. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=17#v.xiv-p5.6
  40. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=17#v.viii-p4.1
  41. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=17#v.viii-p6.4
  42. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=17#v.viii-p11.1
  43. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=17#v.viii-p13.2
  44. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=17#v.viii-p17.7
  45. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=17#v.x-p7.3
  46. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=17#v.xi-p3.6
  47. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=17#v.xi-p16.5
  48. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=17#v.xvii-p1.7
  49. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=23#ii.ii-p5.3
  50. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=0#v.xix-p5.5
  51. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=1#v.viii-p6.6
  52. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=3#v.viii-p4.3
  53. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=4#v.viii-p6.8
  54. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.viii-p6.9
  55. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.viii-p7.1
  56. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.viii-p15.1
  57. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v.viii-p6.1
  58. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v.viii-p7.2
  59. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v.viii-p15.2
  60. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v.xxvi-p8.1
  61. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=7#v.viii-p9.4
  62. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=9#v.iv-p4.7
  63. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=11#v.viii-p19.2
  64. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=15#ii.iv.viii-p1.2
  65. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=15#ii.iv.ii-p2.1
  66. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=15#v.xiv-p15.1
  67. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=15#v.xix-p6.8
  68. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=15#v.xxi-p6.1
  69. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=23#v.viii-p4.4
  70. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=24#v.viii-p4.5
  71. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=4&scrV=7#v.v-p92.2
  72. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=5&scrV=24#iv.ix-p4.2
  73. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=6&scrV=3#v.xvii-p2.8
  74. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=6&scrV=5#v.xii-p9.6
  75. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=8&scrV=0#v.xii-p9.7
  76. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=8&scrV=21#v.xii-p9.8
  77. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=9&scrV=22#v.viii-p1.1
  78. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=12&scrV=0#v.iv-p4.8
  79. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=12&scrV=1#v.iv-p4.9
  80. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=12&scrV=2#v.iii-p22.9
  81. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=12&scrV=3#v.iii-p22.10
  82. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=0#v.xxi-p6.2
  83. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=6#v.ii-p8.4
  84. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=6#v.v-p104.11
  85. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=6#v.xiv-p16.1
  86. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=6#v.xxi-p6.3
  87. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=8#v.ii-p8.5
  88. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=17&scrV=1#v.v-p122.2
  89. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=17&scrV=1#v.v-p126.1
  90. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=17&scrV=7#v.xix-p5.1
  91. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=17&scrV=13#v.xxi-p9.4
  92. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=17&scrV=14#v.viii-p17.1
  93. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=20&scrV=6#v.x-p16.6
  94. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=20&scrV=6#v.xi-p3.4
  95. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=20&scrV=6#v.xi-p8.7
  96. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=21&scrV=33#v.v-p27.1
  97. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=16#iv.xiv-p5.2
  98. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=16#v.v-p82.13
  99. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=17#iv.xiv-p5.3
 100. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=17#v.v-p82.14
 101. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=18#ii.v-p30.1
 102. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=18#ii.iv.ii-p2.2
 103. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=24&scrV=12#ii.i-p34.11
 104. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=26&scrV=13#ii.i-p34.6
 105. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=31&scrV=34#v.xxiv-p21.1
 106. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=31&scrV=53#ii.i-p34.10
 107. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=37&scrV=0#v.x-p17.3
 108. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=37&scrV=0#v.xi-p9.10
 109. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=37&scrV=1#v.xi-p8.2
 110. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=37&scrV=20#v.xi-p8.3
 111. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=37&scrV=26#v.x-p10.5
 112. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=37&scrV=26#v.x-p15.1
 113. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=37&scrV=26#v.xi-p3.17
 114. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=37&scrV=26#v.xi-p7.6
 115. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=37&scrV=27#v.x-p10.6
 116. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=37&scrV=27#v.x-p15.2
 117. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=37&scrV=27#v.x-p16.1
 118. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=37&scrV=27#v.xi-p3.18
 119. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=37&scrV=27#v.xi-p7.7
 120. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=38&scrV=18#v.x-p16.7
 121. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=38&scrV=18#v.xi-p8.8
 122. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=39&scrV=8#v.x-p10.9
 123. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=39&scrV=8#v.xi-p3.19
 124. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=39&scrV=9#v.x-p10.10
 125. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=39&scrV=9#v.xi-p3.20
 126. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=45&scrV=5#v.v-p84.6
 127. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=45&scrV=8#v.x-p22.1
 128. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=45&scrV=8#v.xi-p13.1
 129. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=45&scrV=28#v.v-p84.7
 130. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=49&scrV=3#v.xv-p10.8
 131. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=49&scrV=10#ii.iv.ii-p2.3
 132. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=49&scrV=10#v.ii-p15.4
 133. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=15#ii.i-p34.9
 134. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=4&scrV=1#v.ii-p3.6
 135. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=4&scrV=21#v.x-p23.11
 136. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=4&scrV=21#v.xi-p14.12
 137. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=5&scrV=1#v.ii-p3.4
 138. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=6&scrV=3#v.v-p122.3
 139. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=7&scrV=0#v.x-p23.12
 140. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=7&scrV=0#v.xi-p14.13
 141. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=7&scrV=4#v.x-p23.13
 142. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=7&scrV=4#v.xi-p14.14
 143. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=9&scrV=16#v.iii-p22.5
 144. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=9&scrV=16#v.xi-p5.1
 145. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=41#ii.iv.iii-p1.1
 146. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=44#v.xiii-p9.9
 147. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=13&scrV=2#v.v-p37.4
 148. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=16&scrV=10#v.v-p130.3
 149. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=18&scrV=18#v.xxvi-p6.1
 150. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=18&scrV=20#v.xxvi-p13.3
 151. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=18&scrV=21#v.xxvi-p6.8
 152. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=18&scrV=22#v.xxvi-p6.9
 153. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=19&scrV=6#v.xv-p10.12
 154. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=19&scrV=6#v.xv-p18.10
 155. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=19&scrV=18#v.xiv-p8.15
 156. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=0#v.xiii-p2.7
 157. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=1#ii.ii-p5.6
 158. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=1#v.ii-p3.11
 159. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=1#v.v-p82.4
 160. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=2#ii.i-p32.1
 161. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=2#v.ii-p14.11
 162. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=2#v.xiv-p2.2
 163. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=2#v.v-p82.5
 164. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=3#v.xxiv-p5.1
 165. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=3#v.xxiv-p1.1
 166. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=3#v.xxiv-p4.1
 167. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=3#v.xxiv-p4.2
 168. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=4#v.xxiv-p2.1
 169. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=5#v.xxiv-p7.1
 170. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=12#v.xxvi-p8.4
 171. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=18#v.xxi-p8.1
 172. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=23#v.xxiv-p6.1
 173. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=21&scrV=0#v.xiii-p11.1
 174. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=22&scrV=0#v.xiii-p11.1
 175. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=23&scrV=0#v.xiii-p11.1
 176. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=24&scrV=0#v.iv-p5.7
 177. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=24&scrV=5#v.xiv-p8.10
 178. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=24&scrV=6#v.xiv-p8.11
 179. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=24&scrV=7#v.iv-p5.8
 180. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=30&scrV=1#v.xiv-p9.1
 181. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=30&scrV=18#v.xiv-p9.2
 182. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=4#v.xxiv-p3.3
 183. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=4#v.xxiv-p8.1
 184. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=5#v.xxiv-p3.4
 185. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=8#v.xxiv-p8.5
 186. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=8#v.xxiv-p19.1
 187. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=9#v.xxiv-p8.9
 188. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=10#v.xxiv-p8.10
 189. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=10#v.v-p106.1
 190. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=12#ii.iv.vi-p2.2
 191. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=28#v.xxiv-p8.14
 192. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=31#v.xxiv-p8.7
 193. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=32#ii.iv.vi-p2.1
 194. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=32#v.v-p89.5
 195. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=33#v.v-p89.6
 196. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=33&scrV=18#v.v-p124.4
 197. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=33&scrV=20#v.v-p4.10
 198. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=1#v.xiii-p2.4
 199. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=6#v.v-p102.2
 200. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=6#v.v-p110.1
 201. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=10&scrV=1#v.xxv-p10.1
 202. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=17&scrV=14#ii.v-p14.1
 203. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=18&scrV=21#v.xxiv-p7.17
 204. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=18&scrV=21#v.xxiv-p9.7
 205. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=19&scrV=2#ii.v-p12.1
 206. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=26&scrV=46#v.xiv-p8.7
 207. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=11&scrV=12#v.xxvi-p3.1
 208. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=11&scrV=12#v.xxvi-p5.3
 209. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=11&scrV=13#v.xxvi-p5.4
 210. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=11&scrV=13#v.xxvi-p6.13
 211. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=12&scrV=0#v.xv-p7.2
 212. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=14&scrV=16#ii.iv.vi-p2.3
 213. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=14&scrV=17#v.xiv-p17.7
 214. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=14&scrV=21#v.v-p42.3
 215. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=16&scrV=0#ii.vi-p43.3
 216. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=21&scrV=5#v.vi-p14.1
 217. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=23&scrV=0#v.x-p15.4
 218. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=23&scrV=0#v.xi-p7.9
 219. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=23&scrV=19#v.v-p40.2
 220. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=23&scrV=19#v.v-p108.3
 221. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=23&scrV=19#v.v-p116.3
 222. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=24&scrV=17#ii.iv.ii-p2.4
 223. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=25&scrV=2#v.xxiv-p7.7
 224. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=1&scrV=13#v.xxvi-p6.5
 225. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=1&scrV=15#v.xxvi-p6.6
 226. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=1&scrV=16#v.xxvi-p6.7
 227. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=2#v.iii-p19.1
 228. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=5#v.ii-p14.15
 229. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=6#ii.iv.i-p2.3
 230. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=8#ii.ii-p5.7
 231. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=8#ii.iv.i-p2.2
 232. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=14#v.v-p14.2
 233. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=15#ii.i-p34.1
 234. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=15#v.v-p16.1
 235. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=15#v.xxiv-p6.9
 236. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=16#ii.i-p34.2
 237. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=16#v.v-p16.2
 238. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=24#ii.i-p45.5
 239. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=4&scrV=35#v.v-p36.1
 240. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=5&scrV=6#ii.i-p34.5
 241. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=5&scrV=26#v.xiv-p8.8
 242. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=0#v.xiii-p11.5
 243. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=4#v.xvii-p9.6
 244. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=5#v.ii-p13.12
 245. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=5#v.xvii-p9.7
 246. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=5#v.xviii-p6.5
 247. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=13#v.xxiv-p2.8
 248. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=13#v.xxiv-p2.13
 249. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=19#v.xiii-p11.6
 250. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=7&scrV=7#v.v-p81.4
 251. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=7&scrV=7#v.v-p89.1
 252. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=7&scrV=8#v.v-p83.4
 253. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=7&scrV=8#v.v-p89.2
 254. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=12&scrV=0#v.iii-p19.2
 255. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=12&scrV=0#v.xiii-p9.11
 256. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=12&scrV=28#v.iii-p19.3
 257. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=13&scrV=0#v.xxiv-p2.9
 258. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=13&scrV=1#iv.xx-p20.1
 259. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=13&scrV=6#v.xxiv-p2.10
 260. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=15&scrV=1#v.xiii-p11.3
 261. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=15&scrV=2#v.xiii-p11.4
 262. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=17&scrV=15#v.xiii-p11.2
 263. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=17&scrV=18#v.xxvi-p11.1
 264. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=17&scrV=19#v.iv-p6.8
 265. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=17&scrV=19#v.xxvi-p11.2
 266. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=18&scrV=15#v.ii-p14.8
 267. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=18&scrV=15#v.xv-p6.1
 268. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=18&scrV=16#v.ii-p14.9
 269. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=23&scrV=2#v.xix-p2.1
 270. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=25&scrV=15#v.v-p100.7
 271. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=25&scrV=16#v.v-p100.8
 272. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=27&scrV=26#v.ii-p6.1
 273. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=28&scrV=0#v.iii-p19.6
 274. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=28&scrV=0#v.v-p63.8
 275. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=28&scrV=58#v.iii-p19.7
 276. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=28&scrV=63#v.v-p100.11
 277. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=29&scrV=17#v.xxiv-p9.1
 278. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=29&scrV=29#ii.ii-p5.8
 279. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=29&scrV=29#v.viii-p12.1
 280. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=30&scrV=0#v.iii-p19.4
 281. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=30&scrV=10#v.iii-p19.5
 282. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=31&scrV=0#v.xiii-p9.12
 283. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=31&scrV=16#v.xiii-p9.13
 284. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=31&scrV=16#v.xxiv-p5.3
 285. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=31&scrV=17#v.xxiv-p5.4
 286. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=31&scrV=27#v.xiii-p9.14
 287. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=0#v.xxiv-p9.2
 288. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=14#v.xxiv-p9.3
 289. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=16#v.xxiv-p5.11
 290. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=17#v.xxiv-p1.2
 291. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=17#v.xxiv-p9.4
 292. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=17#v.xxiv-p19.3
 293. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=21#v.ii-p15.5
 294. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=26#v.v-p106.2
 295. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=27#v.v-p105.1
 296. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=27#v.v-p106.3
 297. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=35#v.v-p105.13
 298. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=33&scrV=9#ii.iv.vi-p3.1
 299. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=1&scrV=5#v.xxvi-p4.21
 300. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=1&scrV=7#v.iii-p19.8
 301. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v.iii-p19.9
 302. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v.iii-p20.20
 303. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=1&scrV=9#v.ii-p14.12
 304. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=10&scrV=13#ii.iv-p9.1
 305. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=22&scrV=12#v.xxvi-p9.1
 306. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=24&scrV=19#v.v-p37.1
 307. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=2&scrV=7#v.ii-p9.1
 308. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.ii-p9.2
 309. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=2&scrV=16#v.xxvi-p4.13
 310. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=2&scrV=17#v.xxvi-p4.14
 311. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=6&scrV=36#v.ii-p8.7
 312. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=13&scrV=23#ii.v-p14.2
 313. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=14&scrV=6#v.vii-p7.3
 314. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=17&scrV=4#v.xxiv-p21.4
 315. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=18&scrV=0#v.xxiv-p21.5
 316. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=18&scrV=31#v.xxiv-p21.6
 317. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=20&scrV=0#v.xxvi-p9.4
 318. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=20&scrV=2#v.xix-p2.2
 319. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=25#v.ix-p9.1
 320. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=25#v.x-p23.14
 321. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=25#v.xi-p14.15
 322. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=30#ii.v-p12.4
 323. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=30#v.v-p81.9
 324. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=30#v.v-p82.12
 325. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=30#v.v-p83.5
 326. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=8&scrV=0#v.xxvi-p10.4
 327. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=8&scrV=20#v.xxvi-p10.5
 328. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=9&scrV=1#v.x-p14.14
 329. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=10&scrV=26#v.xxvi-p4.18
 330. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=11&scrV=0#v.xxvi-p4.19
 331. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=11&scrV=7#v.xxvi-p4.20
 332. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=2#v.xxvi-p10.2
 333. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=3#v.xxvi-p10.3
 334. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=25#v.ii-p14.10
 335. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=17#v.v-p89.7
 336. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=21#v.xx-p6.1
 337. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=22#v.xiii-p3.1
 338. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=22#v.xx-p6.2
 339. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=23#v.v-p89.8
 340. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=24#v.xviii-p11.1
 341. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=25#v.xviii-p11.2
 342. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=16&scrV=7#v.v-p49.8
 343. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=16&scrV=12#v.xxvi-p9.5
 344. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=16&scrV=14#v.vii-p7.4
 345. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=20&scrV=31#v.xi-p5.3
 346. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=20&scrV=32#v.xi-p5.4
 347. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=21&scrV=13#v.x-p21.12
 348. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=23&scrV=11#v.v-p63.1
 349. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=23&scrV=11#v.v-p65.1
 350. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=23&scrV=11#v.xi-p6.4
 351. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=23&scrV=11#v.xi-p13.6
 352. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=23&scrV=12#v.v-p63.2
 353. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=23&scrV=12#v.v-p65.2
 354. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=23&scrV=12#v.xi-p6.5
 355. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=24&scrV=7#v.x-p10.11
 356. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=24&scrV=7#v.x-p16.4
 357. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=24&scrV=7#v.xi-p8.5
 358. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=24&scrV=17#v.x-p14.15
 359. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=25&scrV=13#v.ix-p5.2
 360. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=25&scrV=21#v.ix-p5.3
 361. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=25&scrV=22#v.x-p21.9
 362. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=25&scrV=22#v.xi-p12.12
 363. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=25&scrV=26#v.x-p21.10
 364. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=25&scrV=26#v.xi-p12.13
 365. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=25&scrV=31#v.x-p21.11
 366. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v.xxvi-p9.6
 367. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=7&scrV=0#iv.x-p4.1
 368. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=7&scrV=12#ii.iv.ii-p2.5
 369. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=7&scrV=12#v.xv-p18.2
 370. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=7&scrV=14#v.v-p110.9
 371. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=11&scrV=0#v.x-p14.16
 372. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=11&scrV=15#v.ix-p5.6
 373. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=11#v.x-p22.3
 374. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=11#v.xi-p9.1
 375. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=11#v.xi-p13.2
 376. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=11#iv.xx-p19.2
 377. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=11#v.x-p24.2
 378. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=11#v.xi-p15.2
 379. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=12#v.x-p22.4
 380. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=12#v.xi-p9.2
 381. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=12#v.xi-p13.3
 382. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=0#v.x-p22.5
 383. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=16#v.x-p22.6
 384. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=16&scrV=0#v.xi-p9.3
 385. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=16&scrV=0#v.xi-p13.4
 386. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=16&scrV=3#v.ix-p6.3
 387. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=16&scrV=3#v.xxvi-p10.6
 388. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=16&scrV=4#v.ix-p6.4
 389. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=16&scrV=20#iv.xx-p19.1
 390. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=16&scrV=21#v.xi-p9.4
 391. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=17&scrV=0#v.x-p15.3
 392. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=17&scrV=0#v.xi-p7.8
 393. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=17&scrV=14#v.v-p88.8
 394. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=23&scrV=2#v.iv-p4.13
 395. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=23&scrV=3#v.iv-p4.14
 396. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=24&scrV=1#v.xi-p9.5
 397. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=1&scrV=26#v.xxvi-p14.9
 398. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=1&scrV=27#v.xxvi-p14.10
 399. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v.vii-p2.4
 400. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=4&scrV=0#v.x-p9.3
 401. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=8&scrV=0#v.xxiv-p15.1
 402. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=8&scrV=1#v.v-p14.3
 403. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=8&scrV=11#v.v-p130.4
 404. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=8&scrV=27#v.v-p30.1
 405. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=8&scrV=36#v.xxv-p12.2
 406. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=8&scrV=39#v.v-p49.9
 407. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=8&scrV=39#v.v-p61.2
 408. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=8&scrV=39#v.v-p75.1
 409. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=8&scrV=46#v.xii-p13.5
 410. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=10&scrV=9#v.xxvi-p8.3
 411. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=11&scrV=4#v.xxiv-p5.5
 412. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=11&scrV=5#v.xxiv-p5.6
 413. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=11&scrV=7#v.xxiv-p7.2
 414. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=11&scrV=11#v.xxvi-p9.7
 415. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=11&scrV=12#v.xxvi-p9.8
 416. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=12&scrV=0#v.xxiv-p7.3
 417. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=12&scrV=16#ii.vi-p29.1
 418. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=12&scrV=28#v.xxiv-p8.2
 419. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=12&scrV=28#v.xxiv-p21.3
 420. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=12&scrV=28#v.xxvi-p11.3
 421. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=12&scrV=30#v.xxiv-p5.8
 422. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=12&scrV=31#v.xxiv-p7.4
 423. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=12&scrV=32#v.xxiv-p8.4
 424. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=13&scrV=0#v.x-p9.3
 425. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=13&scrV=0#v.xxvi-p11.4
 426. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=13&scrV=2#v.xxvi-p11.5
 427. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=13&scrV=4#v.xi-p3.9
 428. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=14&scrV=0#v.xxiv-p5.9
 429. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=14&scrV=0#v.xxvi-p9.9
 430. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=14&scrV=8#v.xxvi-p9.10
 431. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=14&scrV=9#v.xxiv-p8.8
 432. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=14&scrV=10#v.xxiv-p8.11
 433. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=14&scrV=11#v.xxiv-p8.12
 434. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=14&scrV=16#v.xxiv-p5.10
 435. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=16&scrV=31#v.xxiv-p4.4
 436. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=17&scrV=24#ii.iv.iv-p1.3
 437. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=21#ii.i-p32.3
 438. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=37#v.xviii-p5.1
 439. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=0#v.xi-p3.7
 440. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=18#v.xxiv-p7.8
 441. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=18#v.xxiv-p12.1
 442. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=18#v.xxiv-p18.10
 443. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=21&scrV=0#v.x-p16.5
 444. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=21&scrV=0#v.xi-p8.6
 445. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=21&scrV=27#v.xviii-p11.3
 446. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=22&scrV=5#v.xxvi-p11.6
 447. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v.x-p9.2
 448. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v.x-p16.2
 449. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v.xi-p3.8
 450. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v.xi-p8.1
 451. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iv.ix-p4.3
 452. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=2&scrV=13#iv.ix-p4.4
 453. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=2&scrV=13#iv.ix-p6.1
 454. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=3&scrV=0#v.xxvi-p4.12
 455. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=11&scrV=17#v.xxvi-p4.11
 456. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=13&scrV=4#v.xxvi-p6.3
 457. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=13&scrV=5#v.xxvi-p6.4
 458. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=16&scrV=3#v.xxiii-p9.5
 459. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=17&scrV=11#v.xxiv-p12.2
 460. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=17&scrV=16#v.xxiv-p12.3
 461. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=17&scrV=35#v.xxiv-p7.5
 462. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=17&scrV=35#v.xxiv-p12.4
 463. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=4#v.xxiv-p18.5
 464. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=0#v.x-p9.1
 465. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=22&scrV=20#v.xxv-p12.3
 466. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=21&scrV=1#v.xi-p9.6
 467. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=24&scrV=0#v.xiii-p8.9
 468. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=25&scrV=0#v.xiii-p8.9
 469. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=28&scrV=9#v.iii-p20.2
 470. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=1&scrV=9#v.xxvi-p3.2
 471. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=1&scrV=10#v.xxvi-p3.3
 472. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=12&scrV=7#v.x-p21.7
 473. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=12&scrV=7#v.xi-p12.11
 474. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=12&scrV=8#v.x-p21.8
 475. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=13&scrV=2#v.xxiii-p8.11
 476. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=13&scrV=8#v.xxiii-p8.10
 477. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=13&scrV=10#v.xxiii-p8.12
 478. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=13&scrV=15#v.xxiv-p8.13
 479. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=19&scrV=2#v.xxvi-p6.11
 480. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=19&scrV=6#v.xxvi-p6.2
 481. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=19&scrV=8#v.xxvi-p6.12
 482. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=25&scrV=14#v.xxiv-p5.7
 483. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=25&scrV=20#v.x-p23.15
 484. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=25&scrV=20#v.xi-p14.16
 485. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=26&scrV=18#v.x-p9.5
 486. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=26&scrV=18#v.xi-p3.11
 487. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=26&scrV=21#v.x-p9.6
 488. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=34&scrV=31#v.xxvi-p4.15
 489. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ezra&scrCh=1&scrV=1#ii.iv.iii-p1.2
 490. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v.x-p16.3
 491. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v.x-p22.2
 492. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v.xi-p9.8
 493. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v.xi-p11.5
 494. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v.xiii-p5.8
 495. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=11#v.x-p19.3
 496. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=12#v.x-p19.4
 497. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=12#v.x-p21.6
 498. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=22#v.x-p19.5
 499. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=2&scrV=0#v.x-p16.3
 500. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=2&scrV=0#v.x-p19.6
 501. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v.x-p19.7
 502. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.x-p19.8
 503. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=11&scrV=8#v.v-p30.2
 504. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=11&scrV=9#v.v-p30.3
 505. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=21&scrV=0#iv.viii-p4.2
 506. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=31&scrV=1#v.x-p10.7
 507. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=31&scrV=2#v.x-p10.8
 508. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=33&scrV=4#v.vii-p6.4
 509. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=33&scrV=4#v.vii-p7.1
 510. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=33&scrV=4#v.vii-p12.4
 511. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v.xv-p18.3
 512. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.ii-p14.7
 513. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.ii-p2.4
 514. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=2#ii.i-p4.1
 515. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=21#v.v-p94.2
 516. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=0#v.ii-p15.10
 517. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=0#v.xiii-p12.2
 518. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=0#v.xv-p5.3
 519. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=0#v.xv-p18.3
 520. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=3#ii.vi-p43.2
 521. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=6#v.xv-p5.4
 522. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=6#v.xv-p17.3
 523. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=7#v.xv-p10.5
 524. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=8#ii.i-p61.1
 525. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=8#ii.v-p17.1
 526. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=8#ii.v-p34.1
 527. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v.xxvi-p4.16
 528. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.xv-p18.12
 529. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.x-p24.1
 530. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.xi-p15.1
 531. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=11#v.xv-p18.13
 532. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=12#v.xxvi-p4.17
 533. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=5&scrV=0#v.v-p104.2
 534. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=5&scrV=3#v.v-p104.3
 535. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=5&scrV=4#v.xi-p6.12
 536. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=5&scrV=5#v.v-p100.5
 537. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=5&scrV=5#v.v-p116.2
 538. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=5&scrV=5#v.viii-p10.1
 539. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=5&scrV=5#v.xi-p6.13
 540. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=8&scrV=1#v.v-p129.4
 541. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=9&scrV=8#v.v-p64.1
 542. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=10&scrV=0#v.v-p49.17
 543. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=10&scrV=13#v.v-p49.18
 544. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=10&scrV=14#v.v-p49.19
 545. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=11&scrV=5#v.v-p100.10
 546. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=11&scrV=7#v.v-p100.2
 547. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=11&scrV=7#v.v-p108.1
 548. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=11&scrV=7#v.xx-p2.1
 549. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=13&scrV=1#v.v-p62.1
 550. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=13&scrV=2#v.v-p62.2
 551. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=2#v.v-p102.1
 552. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=2#v.xxv-p11.1
 553. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=9#v.v-p81.8
 554. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=10#v.xv-p18.4
 555. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=11#v.v-p126.2
 556. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=18&scrV=0#v.xxiv-p12.7
 557. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=18&scrV=1#v.xxiv-p12.8
 558. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=18&scrV=2#v.xxiv-p12.9
 559. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=1#ii.i-p18.1
 560. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=1#v.v-p130.5
 561. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=1#v.v-p4.3
 562. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=7#v.iii-p1.3
 563. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=12#v.ix-p8.2
 564. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=0#v.ii-p15.10
 565. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=24&scrV=0#v.vi-p10.12
 566. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=24&scrV=1#v.xxvi-p4.5
 567. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=24&scrV=8#v.vi-p10.13
 568. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=25&scrV=14#ii.i-p70.1
 569. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=25&scrV=14#v.ii-p10.5
 570. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=27&scrV=4#v.xiii-p8.6
 571. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=30&scrV=5#v.v-p110.6
 572. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=1#v.xi-p15.5
 573. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=1#v.xx-p10.6
 574. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=1#v.x-p24.5
 575. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=2#v.xx-p10.7
 576. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=5#v.xx-p10.8
 577. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=5#v.xxv-p11.3
 578. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=6#v.xi-p15.6
 579. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=6#v.xx-p10.9
 580. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=33&scrV=0#v.xvi-p13.2
 581. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=33&scrV=9#v.v-p88.6
 582. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=33&scrV=9#v.v-p113.4
 583. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=33&scrV=9#v.xvi-p13.3
 584. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=33&scrV=11#v.xvi-p13.4
 585. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=14#v.x-p3.2
 586. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=14#v.xviii-p13.1
 587. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=15#v.xviii-p6.1
 588. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=36&scrV=0#v.xxiv-p12.10
 589. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=36&scrV=7#v.xxiv-p12.11
 590. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=36&scrV=10#v.xxiv-p12.12
 591. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=40&scrV=6#v.xv-p10.15
 592. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=40&scrV=6#v.xv-p11.4
 593. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=40&scrV=7#v.ii-p15.22
 594. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=40&scrV=8#ii.v-p27.4
 595. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=40&scrV=8#v.ii-p15.23
 596. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=42&scrV=2#v.v-p42.1
 597. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=7#ii.v-p27.6
 598. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=7#v.xv-p3.2
 599. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=7#v.xv-p17.4
 600. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=9#ii.iii-p11.3
 601. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=46&scrV=1#v.xxiv-p12.5
 602. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=46&scrV=2#v.xxiv-p12.6
 603. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=10#v.ix-p6.1
 604. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=13#v.ix-p6.2
 605. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=62&scrV=0#v.xxiv-p12.13
 606. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=62&scrV=0#v.xxvi-p2.5
 607. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=62&scrV=2#v.xxiv-p12.14
 608. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=62&scrV=3#v.xxiv-p12.15
 609. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=62&scrV=6#v.xxiv-p12.16
 610. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=17#v.xix-p3.2
 611. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=0#iv.viii-p4.1
 612. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=25#ii.i-p20.1
 613. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=80&scrV=0#v.xviii-p10.3
 614. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=81&scrV=0#v.xx-p3.4
 615. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=81&scrV=9#v.xxiv-p5.2
 616. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=81&scrV=11#v.xvii-p14.6
 617. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=81&scrV=12#v.xi-p6.10
 618. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=81&scrV=13#v.v-p82.9
 619. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=81&scrV=13#v.v-p88.15
 620. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=81&scrV=13#v.v-p104.9
 621. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=81&scrV=13#v.xi-p6.11
 622. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=81&scrV=13#v.v-p104.1
 623. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=82&scrV=1#v.xxiv-p18.1
 624. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=82&scrV=1#v.xxvi-p7.2
 625. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=82&scrV=1#v.xxvi-p12.1
 626. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=82&scrV=6#v.xxiv-p18.2
 627. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=82&scrV=6#v.xxvi-p7.3
 628. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=89&scrV=0#v.xv-p10.6
 629. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=89&scrV=5#v.xv-p18.7
 630. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=89&scrV=21#v.xv-p17.6
 631. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=89&scrV=27#v.xv-p10.7
 632. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=90&scrV=9#v.v-p27.2
 633. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=91&scrV=11#v.x-p23.5
 634. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=91&scrV=11#v.xi-p14.6
 635. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=94&scrV=0#v.v-p49.14
 636. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=94&scrV=9#v.v-p5.1
 637. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=94&scrV=9#v.v-p49.15
 638. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=94&scrV=9#v.v-p52.2
 639. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=94&scrV=9#v.xi-p6.8
 640. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=94&scrV=10#v.v-p5.2
 641. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=94&scrV=10#v.v-p49.16
 642. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=94&scrV=10#v.v-p52.3
 643. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=94&scrV=10#v.xi-p6.9
 644. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=94&scrV=11#v.v-p49.10
 645. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=95&scrV=3#v.vi-p10.11
 646. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=95&scrV=7#v.xviii-p14.3
 647. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=95&scrV=8#v.xviii-p14.4
 648. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=96&scrV=0#v.xv-p18.8
 649. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=96&scrV=6#v.xv-p18.9
 650. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=101&scrV=8#v.xxvi-p6.16
 651. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=102&scrV=0#ii.i-p14.5
 652. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=102&scrV=25#v.vi-p14.4
 653. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=102&scrV=26#v.vi-p14.5
 654. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=102&scrV=27#v.v-p11.1
 655. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=102&scrV=27#v.v-p33.1
 656. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=9#v.v-p110.4
 657. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=10#v.v-p110.5
 658. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=13#v.v-p110.10
 659. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=14#v.v-p110.11
 660. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=4#v.vii-p2.2
 661. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=20#v.xxiv-p8.3
 662. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=24#v.v-p74.1
 663. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=29#v.v-p6.2
 664. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=30#v.vii-p7.2
 665. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=37#v.xxiv-p9.5
 666. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=38#v.xxiv-p9.6
 667. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=148#v.v-p6.3
 668. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=105&scrV=17#v.xi-p8.4
 669. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=105&scrV=25#v.xi-p9.7
 670. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=106&scrV=31#v.xx-p3.6
 671. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=0#v.ii-p15.10
 672. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=0#v.xv-p18.14
 673. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=1#v.xv-p17.15
 674. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=1#v.xix-p18.3
 675. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=1#v.xv-p19.2
 676. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=2#v.xix-p18.4
 677. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=3#ii.i-p61.2
 678. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=3#v.xv-p18.6
 679. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=3#v.xv-p18.15
 680. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=4#ii.v-p17.2
 681. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=4#v.xv-p5.2
 682. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=4#v.xv-p10.1
 683. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=4#v.xv-p11.1
 684. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=4#v.xv-p11.6
 685. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=115&scrV=3#v.v-p77.2
 686. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=115&scrV=3#v.v-p88.1
 687. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=115&scrV=3#v.v-p113.1
 688. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=115&scrV=3#v.v-p114.1
 689. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=115&scrV=3#v.xvi-p13.1
 690. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=115&scrV=4#v.xxiv-p2.3
 691. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=115&scrV=8#v.xxiv-p7.11
 692. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=116&scrV=12#v.xiii-p5.4
 693. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=116&scrV=13#v.xiii-p5.5
 694. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=118&scrV=22#ii.iv.v-p5.5
 695. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=118&scrV=22#v.ii-p15.17
 696. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=118&scrV=22#v.xv-p9.1
 697. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=118&scrV=23#ii.iv.v-p5.6
 698. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=118&scrV=23#v.ii-p15.18
 699. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=0#v.xviii-p10.4
 700. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=67#v.x-p24.3
 701. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=67#v.xi-p15.3
 702. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=71#v.xviii-p7.17
 703. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=98#ii.i-p65.2
 704. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=105#v.ii-p6.2
 705. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=105#v.x-p14.1
 706. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=105#v.xi-p7.1
 707. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=105#v.xiv-p19.18
 708. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=106#v.ii-p6.3
 709. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=137#v.v-p81.16
 710. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=122&scrV=0#ii.vi-p105.1
 711. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=122&scrV=3#v.xiii-p12.1
 712. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=122&scrV=6#ii.vi-p79.1
 713. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=124&scrV=2#v.x-p21.1
 714. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=124&scrV=2#v.xi-p12.8
 715. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=124&scrV=3#v.x-p21.2
 716. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=124&scrV=3#v.xi-p12.9
 717. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=125&scrV=3#v.x-p20.3
 718. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=125&scrV=3#v.xi-p12.2
 719. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=135&scrV=1#v.v-p49.6
 720. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=0#v.v-p49.13
 721. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=4#v.v-p63.7
 722. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=7#v.vii-p12.8
 723. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=7#v.vii-p4.8
 724. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=8#v.v-p20.7
 725. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=8#v.v-p31.1
 726. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=143&scrV=0#v.xx-p10.10
 727. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=143&scrV=0#v.xxv-p11.4
 728. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=143&scrV=2#iv.xxii-p8.1
 729. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=143&scrV=2#v.xx-p5.4
 730. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=143&scrV=2#v.xx-p8.5
 731. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=143&scrV=2#v.xx-p10.11
 732. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=143&scrV=2#v.xxv-p11.5
 733. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=144&scrV=15#ii.v-p13.1
 734. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=145&scrV=3#v.v-p23.1
 735. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=145&scrV=17#v.v-p108.9
 736. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=147&scrV=4#v.v-p49.4
 737. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=147&scrV=5#v.v-p49.12
 738. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=147&scrV=5#v.v-p59.1
 739. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=147&scrV=5#v.v-p67.6
 740. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=147&scrV=5#v.x-p1.2
 741. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=147&scrV=5#v.xi-p1.2
 742. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=147&scrV=20#iv.xxv-p2.3
 743. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=1&scrV=24#v.xvii-p1.1
 744. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=1&scrV=24#v.xvii-p9.1
 745. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=1&scrV=24#v.v-p104.10
 746. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=1&scrV=24#v.xvii-p10.3
 747. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=8&scrV=0#ii.ii-p7.2
 748. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=8&scrV=22#v.v-p80.4
 749. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=16&scrV=4#v.v-p80.5
 750. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=16&scrV=4#v.v-p81.1
 751. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=16&scrV=4#v.v-p82.1
 752. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=16&scrV=4#v.v-p87.1
 753. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=16&scrV=4#v.v-p100.1
 754. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=16&scrV=9#v.x-p18.2
 755. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=20&scrV=26#v.xxvi-p6.14
 756. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=20&scrV=28#v.xxvi-p6.15
 757. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=21&scrV=1#v.x-p18.3
 758. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=29&scrV=4#v.xxvi-p2.4
 759. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=30&scrV=20#v.xxiv-p21.8
 760. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=12&scrV=7#iv.ix-p4.1
 761. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=8&scrV=0#ii.iii-p11.4
 762. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=8&scrV=8#v.xxiii-p10.1
 763. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.xxiii-p9.10
 764. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=15#ii.v-p12.3
 765. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=24#v.v-p100.9
 766. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=2&scrV=3#v.xiv-p2.3
 767. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=2&scrV=3#v.xiv-p8.16
 768. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=2&scrV=3#v.xxi-p8.4
 769. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=4&scrV=8#v.v-p5.5
 770. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=4&scrV=9#v.v-p5.6
 771. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=4#v.v-p82.10
 772. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=4#v.v-p88.9
 773. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=4#v.v-p105.2
 774. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=4#v.v-p109.1
 775. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=4#v.viii-p11.2
 776. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=4#v.xi-p16.2
 777. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=5#v.v-p82.11
 778. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=5#v.v-p88.10
 779. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=23#v.xx-p3.2
 780. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=0#v.xvii-p14.8
 781. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=3#v.v-p37.2
 782. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=7#v.xi-p16.6
 783. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=9#v.x-p23.1
 784. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=9#v.xi-p14.3
 785. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=9#v.xvii-p14.9
 786. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=10#v.x-p23.2
 787. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=10#v.xi-p14.4
 788. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=10#v.xvii-p14.10
 789. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=14#ii.iv.ii-p2.6
 790. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=8&scrV=14#v.vi-p14.7
 791. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=15#v.xxii-p10.1
 792. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=10&scrV=5#v.v-p84.3
 793. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=10&scrV=5#v.xi-p9.9
 794. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=10&scrV=5#v.xi-p13.5
 795. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=10&scrV=5#v.x-p19.9
 796. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=10&scrV=5#v.xi-p11.6
 797. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=10&scrV=6#v.v-p84.4
 798. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=10&scrV=7#v.v-p84.5
 799. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=10&scrV=15#v.x-p19.10
 800. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=2#v.vii-p3.3
 801. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=2#v.vii-p6.12
 802. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=2#v.vii-p7.5
 803. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=2#v.vii-p12.6
 804. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=2#v.xii-p12.3
 805. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=2#v.xv-p3.1
 806. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=2#v.xv-p17.5
 807. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=27&scrV=4#v.v-p105.11
 808. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=28&scrV=16#v.xxii-p4.5
 809. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=28&scrV=21#v.v-p89.10
 810. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=29&scrV=13#v.xxv-p10.2
 811. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=30&scrV=21#v.xxiii-p8.4
 812. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=31&scrV=6#v.xviii-p7.16
 813. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=0#v.v-p70.2
 814. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=28#v.v-p70.3
 815. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=8#ii.iv-p9.2
 816. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=12#v.v-p20.5
 817. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=13#v.v-p66.1
 818. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=14#v.v-p66.2
 819. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=15#v.v-p5.8
 820. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=17#ii.i-p14.2
 821. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=17#v.v-p5.9
 822. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=18#v.v-p16.4
 823. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=19#v.xxiv-p4.5
 824. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=20#v.xxiv-p4.6
 825. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=22#ii.i-p14.3
 826. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=22#v.v-p5.10
 827. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=22#v.v-p20.6
 828. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=23#ii.i-p14.4
 829. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=25#v.v-p5.11
 830. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=28#v.v-p33.5
 831. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=28#v.v-p49.11
 832. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=0#v.ii-p14.3
 833. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=12#v.ii-p14.4
 834. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=23#ii.iv.iii-p1.3
 835. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=25#v.ii-p14.5
 836. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=26#v.ii-p14.6
 837. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=8#v.xxiv-p3.1
 838. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=5#v.ii-p14.13
 839. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=7#v.v-p81.2
 840. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=10#v.v-p18.1
 841. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=10#v.v-p23.2
 842. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=0#v.v-p18.2
 843. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=6#v.v-p3.1
 844. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=6#v.v-p27.3
 845. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=7#v.ii-p9.5
 846. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=7#v.ii-p14.1
 847. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=7#v.v-p63.5
 848. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=8#v.v-p18.3
 849. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=8#v.ii-p9.6
 850. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=8#v.ii-p14.2
 851. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=9#v.v-p23.3
 852. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=12#v.xxiv-p6.2
 853. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=15#v.xxiv-p3.10
 854. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=17#v.xxiv-p3.11
 855. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=44&scrV=17#v.xxiv-p19.2
 856. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=5#ii.i-p32.2
 857. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=20#v.xxiv-p7.9
 858. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=20#v.xxiv-p12.17
 859. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=22#v.xxvi-p2.6
 860. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=23#v.xxvi-p2.7
 861. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=8#v.v-p70.1
 862. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=8#v.v-p110.2
 863. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=9#v.v-p110.3
 864. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=18#v.v-p104.4
 865. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=48&scrV=19#v.v-p104.5
 866. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=15#v.v-p5.4
 867. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=1#v.ii-p16.6
 868. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=4#v.xv-p10.2
 869. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=5#v.xviii-p7.8
 870. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=10#ii.i-p61.5
 871. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=10#ii.v-p34.3
 872. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=10#v.xv-p18.5
 873. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=10#v.xv-p10.3
 874. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=11#ii.i-p61.6
 875. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=11#ii.v-p27.1
 876. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=11#ii.v-p27.3
 877. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=8#v.xvi-p14.4
 878. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=55&scrV=9#ii.ii-p7.1
 879. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=21#v.iv-p4.1
 880. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=1#v.vii-p7.7
 881. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=1#v.vii-p10.2
 882. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=1#v.xv-p7.7
 883. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=62&scrV=5#v.v-p104.8
 884. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=62&scrV=16#v.xxv-p12.1
 885. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=3#v.v-p105.8
 886. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=6#v.v-p105.17
 887. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=10#v.vii-p7.12
 888. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=10#v.xv-p19.1
 889. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=10#v.xvii-p14.7
 890. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=1#v.ii-p15.20
 891. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=1#v.v-p31.2
 892. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=4#v.v-p100.12
 893. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v.ii-p14.14
 894. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=1&scrV=12#v.xix-p11.5
 895. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=5#v.xxiv-p7.13
 896. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=11#v.xxiv-p5.12
 897. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=11#v.xxiii-p9.4
 898. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v.xxiv-p5.13
 899. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=20#v.xxiv-p7.14
 900. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=27#v.xxiv-p3.12
 901. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=27#v.xxiv-p6.3
 902. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.v-p110.7
 903. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=4&scrV=1#v.xviii-p13.2
 904. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=4&scrV=2#v.v-p44.4
 905. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=5&scrV=7#v.v-p104.6
 906. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=5&scrV=7#v.xxiv-p7.12
 907. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=5&scrV=9#v.v-p104.7
 908. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=9&scrV=9#v.v-p94.1
 909. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=9&scrV=9#v.v-p105.12
 910. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=9&scrV=24#ii.i-p45.4
 911. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=9&scrV=24#v.iii-p18.5
 912. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=10&scrV=3#v.xxiv-p6.4
 913. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=10&scrV=5#v.xxiv-p7.10
 914. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=10&scrV=9#v.xxiv-p6.5
 915. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=10&scrV=11#ii.i-p34.3
 916. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=10&scrV=14#v.xxiv-p4.7
 917. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=10&scrV=14#v.xxiv-p6.6
 918. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=10&scrV=24#v.v-p105.14
 919. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=11&scrV=0#v.xxiv-p7.15
 920. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=11&scrV=3#v.xix-p5.4
 921. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=11&scrV=8#v.xxiv-p7.16
 922. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=12&scrV=0#v.v-p105.15
 923. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=12&scrV=13#v.v-p105.16
 924. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=13&scrV=10#v.xii-p9.2
 925. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=13&scrV=23#v.v-p105.5
 926. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=17&scrV=0#v.xii-p9.3
 927. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=17&scrV=9#v.xii-p9.4
 928. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=18&scrV=6#v.v-p63.4
 929. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=18&scrV=6#v.v-p113.5
 930. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=18&scrV=6#v.xi-p6.7
 931. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=18&scrV=6#v.xvi-p4.2
 932. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=18&scrV=7#v.v-p83.6
 933. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=18&scrV=8#v.v-p83.7
 934. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=18&scrV=8#v.v-p104.12
 935. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=5#v.xv-p17.1
 936. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=7#ii.i-p34.7
 937. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=8#ii.i-p34.8
 938. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=24#v.v-p31.3
 939. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=27&scrV=2#v.xxvi-p4.6
 940. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=27&scrV=6#v.xxvi-p4.7
 941. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=28&scrV=8#v.ii-p15.2
 942. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=0#v.xii-p12.2
 943. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=18#v.xviii-p7.1
 944. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=18#v.xviii-p10.2
 945. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=31#v.iii-p20.14
 946. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=31#v.xv-p18.11
 947. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=32#v.x-p7.1
 948. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=32#v.xiv-p13.2
 949. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=33#v.x-p7.2
 950. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=33#v.x-p14.6
 951. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=33#v.xi-p7.4
 952. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=33#v.xiv-p9.3
 953. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=33#v.xix-p6.1
 954. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=32&scrV=0#v.iii-p20.15
 955. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=32&scrV=0#v.xii-p12.2
 956. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=32&scrV=38#v.xvii-p9.8
 957. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=32&scrV=38#v.iii-p20.16
 958. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=32&scrV=39#v.xvii-p9.9
 959. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=32&scrV=40#v.x-p14.8
 960. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=32&scrV=40#v.xi-p7.5
 961. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=3&scrV=22#v.v-p40.3
 962. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=3&scrV=33#v.v-p89.9
 963. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=3&scrV=37#v.v-p84.1
 964. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=3&scrV=37#v.v-p113.2
 965. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=3&scrV=38#v.v-p84.2
 966. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=3&scrV=38#v.v-p113.3
 967. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=4&scrV=20#v.xxvi-p7.4
 968. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=2&scrV=5#v.iv-p4.10
 969. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v.xvii-p7.7
 970. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=5&scrV=0#v.iv-p4.11
 971. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=5&scrV=1#v.iv-p4.12
 972. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=8&scrV=10#v.xxiv-p6.7
 973. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=8&scrV=11#v.xxiv-p6.8
 974. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=8&scrV=11#v.xxiv-p7.6
 975. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=11&scrV=1#v.xxvi-p12.2
 976. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=11&scrV=19#v.x-p14.5
 977. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=11&scrV=19#v.xi-p7.3
 978. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=13&scrV=13#v.v-p105.9
 979. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=13&scrV=14#v.v-p105.10
 980. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=13&scrV=18#ii.vi-p47.1
 981. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=16&scrV=3#v.xviii-p7.13
 982. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=16&scrV=6#v.v-p101.4
 983. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=16&scrV=20#v.xxiii-p9.6
 984. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=18&scrV=23#ii.v-p30.2
 985. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=18&scrV=23#v.v-p109.2
 986. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=18&scrV=28#v.xviii-p6.2
 987. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=18&scrV=32#v.ix-p8.3
 988. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=21&scrV=19#v.x-p18.4
 989. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=21&scrV=19#v.xi-p11.2
 990. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=25&scrV=11#v.v-p100.6
 991. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=33&scrV=11#v.v-p92.1
 992. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=34&scrV=2#v.xxvi-p3.7
 993. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=34&scrV=2#v.xxvi-p10.1
 994. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=34&scrV=23#v.xiii-p12.3
 995. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=34&scrV=24#v.xiii-p12.4
 996. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=25#v.xviii-p7.2
 997. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=26#v.xii-p9.5
 998. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=26#v.xviii-p7.3
 999. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=37&scrV=24#v.xv-p17.2
1000. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=37&scrV=25#v.xv-p18.1
1001. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=17#v.v-p118.1
1002. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=18#v.v-p118.2
1003. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=18#v.viii-p14.2
1004. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=46#v.v-p6.8
1005. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=24#v.xv-p15.8
1006. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=24#v.xvi-p5.6
1007. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=25#v.ii-p15.24
1008. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=25#v.ii-p15.6
1009. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=26#v.ii-p15.25
1010. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=26#v.ii-p15.7
1011. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=6#v.x-p10.2
1012. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=6#v.x-p20.4
1013. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=6#v.xi-p3.15
1014. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=6#v.xi-p12.3
1015. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=7#v.x-p10.3
1016. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=7#v.xi-p3.16
1017. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=7#v.xi-p12.4
1018. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=21#v.v-p83.1
1019. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=22#v.v-p83.2
1020. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=11&scrV=9#v.v-p40.4
1021. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=13&scrV=11#v.x-p14.13
1022. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v.v-p110.8
1023. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=2&scrV=28#v.vii-p7.10
1024. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=2&scrV=28#v.vii-p9.5
1025. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=2&scrV=8#ii.iii-p22.1
1026. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=5&scrV=21#v.xx-p6.3
1027. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=5&scrV=21#v.xiii-p3.2
1028. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=3&scrV=8#v.vii-p6.10
1029. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=4&scrV=2#v.xiv-p8.17
1030. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=4&scrV=2#v.xxi-p8.5
1031. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=5&scrV=2#v.vi-p7.3
1032. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=5&scrV=2#v.vi-p16.1
1033. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=5&scrV=3#v.vi-p16.2
1034. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=6&scrV=6#v.xiii-p3.3
1035. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=6&scrV=6#v.xx-p7.1
1036. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=6&scrV=8#v.v-p82.6
1037. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Zeph&scrCh=2&scrV=11#v.ii-p16.3
1038. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Hag&scrCh=2&scrV=7#v.xiv-p19.7
1039. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v.xviii-p6.4
1040. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=11&scrV=15#v.xxii-p15.3
1041. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=12&scrV=10#v.xii-p12.4
1042. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=12&scrV=10#v.xv-p15.5
1043. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=13&scrV=1#v.xv-p15.6
1044. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=13&scrV=2#v.ii-p16.2
1045. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=6#v.xiii-p3.5
1046. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=6#v.xxiv-p2.12
1047. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=10#ii.i-p52.5
1048. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=10#v.ii-p15.8
1049. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=10#v.xv-p18.16
1050. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=11#v.ii-p15.9
1051. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=11#v.xv-p18.17
1052. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=2&scrV=7#ii.v-p11.1
1053. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=2&scrV=17#v.xi-p1.4
1054. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=0#v.xi-p1.5
1055. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=1#v.xiv-p17.1
1056. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=1#v.xiv-p19.8
1057. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v.v-p33.2
1058. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v.v-p40.1
1059. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v.v-p81.10
1060. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=14#v.xi-p1.6
1061. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v.ii-p15.1
1062. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v.xiii-p2.5
1063. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=5&scrV=7#v.xviii-p6.3
1064. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v.ii-p15.11
1065. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v.xi-p8.9
1066. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=21#v.xv-p2.1
1067. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=0#v.ii-p15.11
1068. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=2#v.xv-p17.7
1069. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=6#v.xv-p17.8
1070. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=1#v.xviii-p9.1
1071. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=2#v.xiii-p13.1
1072. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=8#v.xviii-p9.8
1073. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=8#v.xviii-p12.4
1074. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=9#iii.ii.iii-p75.1
1075. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=9#v.v-p117.3
1076. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=9#v.v-p119.1
1077. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v.xv-p6.5
1078. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=17#v.xvi-p5.2
1079. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=3#v.iii-p24.2
1080. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v.iii-p24.3
1081. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=8#v.xxiv-p18.12
1082. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=10#v.xxiv-p2.11
1083. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=17#v.xv-p18.18
1084. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=18#v.ii-p16.10
1085. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=19#v.ii-p16.11
1086. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=9#ii.vi-p104.1
1087. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=12#iii.ii.iii-p37.3
1088. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=12#iv.ix-p4.10
1089. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=15#v.xix-p9.1
1090. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=16#v.xiii-p5.12
1091. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=16#v.xix-p9.2
1092. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=19#v.iv-p6.4
1093. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=45#iii.ii.iii-p24.1
1094. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=45#v.xv-p20.2
1095. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=48#v.v-p122.1
1096. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=48#v.v-p123.7
1097. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=2#v.ix-p3.1
1098. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=13#v.vi-p2.6
1099. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=24#v.xxvi-p5.7
1100. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=33#ii.i-p65.1
1101. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=33#v.xiv-p7.14
1102. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=33#v.xxvi-p5.9
1103. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=0#v.xviii-p9.9
1104. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=11#v.v-p5.3
1105. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=17#v.xviii-p9.10
1106. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=18#v.xii-p10.1
1107. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=2#v.v-p118.5
1108. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=11#iv.ix-p4.8
1109. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=0#v.iv-p3.6
1110. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=13#v.iv-p6.1
1111. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=13#v.iv-p3.7
1112. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=13#v.xvi-p7.10
1113. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=13#v.xvii-p1.8
1114. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=13#v.xvii-p6.1
1115. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=13#v.xix-p11.1
1116. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=13#v.xix-p12.4
1117. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=18#v.xxiv-p18.11
1118. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=11#iv.vii-p4.3
1119. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=11#v.xvii-p6.13
1120. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=16#ii.iv.v-p3.3
1121. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=20#v.iv-p4.15
1122. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=20#v.ii-p7.11
1123. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=30#v.v-p49.5
1124. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=31#ii.vi-p27.1
1125. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=0#v.xvi-p7.11
1126. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=0#v.xix-p11.2
1127. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=0#v.xix-p12.5
1128. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=5#v.xv-p7.8
1129. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=11#v.xiii-p13.5
1130. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=11#v.xix-p6.11
1131. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=17#ii.ii-p10.7
1132. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=19#v.xx-p3.3
1133. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=20#v.xvii-p1.2
1134. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=21#v.v-p63.3
1135. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=21#v.v-p65.3
1136. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=21#v.xi-p3.1
1137. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=21#v.xvii-p1.3
1138. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=21#v.xvii-p7.8
1139. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=21#v.xi-p16.3
1140. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=23#v.ix-p9.2
1141. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=23#v.xi-p3.2
1142. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=23#v.xvii-p7.9
1143. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=25#iv.vii-p4.1
1144. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=25#v.ii-p10.3
1145. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=25#v.v-p92.4
1146. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=25#v.vi-p3.1
1147. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=25#v.xvi-p7.15
1148. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=25#v.v-p114.2
1149. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=26#v.v-p81.5
1150. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=26#v.v-p92.5
1151. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=27#ii.ii-p12.1
1152. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=27#ii.ii-p17.1
1153. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=27#v.v-p49.3
1154. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=27#v.vi-p8.3
1155. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=27#v.xxii-p6.1
1156. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=28#v.xvi-p7.12
1157. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=28#v.xvii-p2.2
1158. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=28#v.xix-p11.3
1159. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=28#v.xix-p12.6
1160. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=29#v.xiv-p10.7
1161. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=30#v.xiv-p10.8
1162. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=30#v.xxi-p8.7
1163. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=25#v.vi-p11.12
1164. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=28#v.vii-p3.4
1165. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=30#ii.vi-p14.1
1166. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=31#v.vii-p7.14
1167. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=32#v.vii-p7.15
1168. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=32#v.ix-p10.2
1169. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=38#v.ii-p8.19
1170. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=39#v.ii-p8.20
1171. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=0#v.xvi-p7.16
1172. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=2#v.ii-p8.14
1173. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=11#iv.xiii-p5.1
1174. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=11#v.xvi-p7.17
1175. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=12#iv.xiii-p5.2
1176. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=23#ii.vi-p39.1
1177. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=9#v.xix-p17.2
1178. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=9#v.xxv-p10.3
1179. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=19#v.xii-p9.9
1180. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=0#v.ii-p8.21
1181. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=0#v.xiii-p13.2
1182. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=1#v.ii-p8.22
1183. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=17#ii.ii-p10.5
1184. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=18#v.ii-p5.1
1185. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=18#v.xxii-p4.4
1186. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=24#v.ii-p13.1
1187. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=25#v.ii-p13.2
1188. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=28#v.xiii-p13.3
1189. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=2#v.v-p130.1
1190. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=5#ii.iii-p20.1
1191. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=5#v.ii-p3.12
1192. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=5#v.xv-p5.1
1193. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=10#iv.xviii-p5.1
1194. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=20#v.xxv-p12.4
1195. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=32#iv.xiv-p5.1
1196. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=17#v.v-p35.2
1197. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=17#v.v-p39.1
1198. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=17#v.v-p80.1
1199. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=14#v.xvi-p4.3
1200. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=15#v.xvi-p4.4
1201. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=16#v.xix-p16.5
1202. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=28#ii.v-p33.1
1203. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=28#v.xv-p15.15
1204. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=22#v.iv-p3.4
1205. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=23#v.iv-p3.5
1206. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=33#v.v-p109.3
1207. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=39#v.v-p88.11
1208. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=42#v.ii-p15.19
1209. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=46#v.x-p10.1
1210. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=46#v.xi-p3.14
1211. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=0#v.iii-p24.4
1212. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=29#v.iii-p24.5
1213. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=36#v.xiii-p3.4
1214. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=37#v.iii-p21.5
1215. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=37#v.ii-p6.6
1216. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=0#v.xvii-p1.4
1217. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=4#ii.vi-p45.2
1218. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=23#v.iv-p6.3
1219. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=37#iii.ii.iii-p42.4
1220. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=37#v.v-p90.3
1221. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=37#v.xvii-p1.5
1222. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=38#v.v-p90.4
1223. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=0#v.ii-p15.11
1224. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=0#v.xxii-p13.1
1225. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=14#v.iii-p13.5
1226. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=22#v.x-p20.2
1227. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=22#v.xi-p12.1
1228. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=36#v.v-p75.2
1229. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=0#iv.ix-p4.9
1230. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=0#v.xv-p20.4
1231. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=19#v.xxii-p7.14
1232. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=41#iii.ii.iii-p38.4
1233. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=41#v.xi-p14.1
1234. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=0#v.v-p117.4
1235. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=2#v.xi-p5.5
1236. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=14#v.ix-p5.4
1237. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=15#v.ix-p5.5
1238. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=24#iii.ii.iii-p31.1
1239. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=26#v.xxiv-p11.1
1240. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=28#ii.v-p33.2
1241. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=28#ii.v-p41.2
1242. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=28#v.xiv-p8.14
1243. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=28#v.xiv-p11.5
1244. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=28#v.xix-p6.2
1245. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=53#v.v-p117.5
1246. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=53#v.xi-p5.6
1247. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=70#v.x-p14.10
1248. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=0#v.ii-p15.11
1249. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=3#v.xviii-p11.4
1250. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=42#v.ii-p8.25
1251. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=18#ii.v-p35.1
1252. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=18#v.xxii-p6.3
1253. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=18#v.xxii-p7.6
1254. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=19#v.ii-p18.1
1255. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=19#v.vi-p4.1
1256. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=19#v.vi-p7.1
1257. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=19#v.vi-p15.1
1258. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=19#v.vii-p4.1
1259. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=19#v.vii-p8.1
1260. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=19#v.vii-p9.9
1261. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=19#v.xiv-p18.13
1262. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=19#v.xv-p17.10
1263. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=19#v.xv-p19.6
1264. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=19#v.xix-p20.7
1265. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=20#v.ii-p18.2
1266. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=20#v.vi-p11.3
1267. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=20#v.xv-p19.7
1268. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=20#v.xix-p18.1
1269. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=20#v.xxii-p7.10
1270. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=48&scrV=0#v.xxii-p13.1
1271. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=4#v.xviii-p9.2
1272. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=14#v.xv-p19.4
1273. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=15#v.iv-p3.3
1274. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=15#iii.ii.iii-p62.1
1275. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=15#v.xv-p19.5
1276. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=3&scrV=35#v.v-p88.2
1277. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=18#v.x-p1.1
1278. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=18#v.xi-p1.1
1279. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=12&scrV=7#ii.v-p42.3
1280. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=13&scrV=32#v.xxv-p12.5
1281. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=36#v.v-p115.4
1282. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=38#v.x-p14.7
1283. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=56#v.x-p12.1
1284. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=0#iii.ii.iii-p62.2
1285. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=15#v.ii-p18.3
1286. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=15#v.xiv-p18.14
1287. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=16#iii.ii.iii-p62.3
1288. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=16#v.xv-p20.1
1289. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=16#v.xviii-p9.12
1290. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=17#v.ii-p3.9
1291. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=20#v.ii-p3.10
1292. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=20#v.xix-p20.12
1293. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=20#v.xxii-p7.11
1294. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.iii-p20.21
1295. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=4#v.ii-p8.1
1296. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=19#v.v-p118.6
1297. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=20#v.v-p118.7
1298. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=34#v.v-p118.8
1299. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=35#v.vii-p2.3
1300. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=35#v.vii-p7.6
1301. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=35#v.vii-p12.5
1302. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=37#v.v-p115.1
1303. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=55#v.ii-p15.12
1304. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=68#v.xv-p16.4
1305. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=70#v.ii-p15.13
1306. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=74#v.xvii-p9.10
1307. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=75#ii.i-p55.3
1308. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=75#v.xvii-p9.11
1309. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=78#v.xxi-p3.7
1310. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v.v-p130.2
1311. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.xiv-p16.23
1312. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=25#iv.x-p3.1
1313. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=34#v.vi-p14.8
1314. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=8#v.xviii-p12.5
1315. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v.vii-p4.3
1316. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=22#v.vii-p7.9
1317. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=22#v.xvi-p5.3
1318. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=38#v.xix-p4.2
1319. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=0#v.xv-p7.1
1320. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=5#v.xviii-p6.11
1321. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=6#v.xviii-p6.12
1322. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=21#v.xv-p6.3
1323. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=13#v.ii-p16.9
1324. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=30#iii.ii.iii-p42.5
1325. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=30#v.iii-p17.1
1326. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=30#v.ii-p10.9
1327. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=30#v.xvi-p11.2
1328. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=30#v.xvii-p10.5
1329. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=30#v.xvii-p14.2
1330. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=54#v.ii-p19.4
1331. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=55#v.ii-p19.5
1332. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=16#ii.iv.viii-p3.1
1333. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=42#ii.i-p70.2
1334. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=1#iii.ii.iii-p58.1
1335. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=13#ii.vi-p79.2
1336. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=20#v.vii-p3.5
1337. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=20#v.vii-p12.7
1338. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=10#v.ix-p10.3
1339. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=28#v.xi-p1.7
1340. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=45#v.xxiii-p21.2
1341. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=3#v.xviii-p7.14
1342. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=5#v.xviii-p7.15
1343. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=6#v.v-p105.3
1344. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=6#v.v-p109.4
1345. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=7#v.v-p105.4
1346. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=26#ii.vi-p12.1
1347. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=26#v.iv-p6.5
1348. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=9#iv.ix-p4.13
1349. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=15#v.xx-p3.5
1350. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=16#v.iii-p20.19
1351. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=22#iv.ix-p4.6
1352. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=23#iv.ix-p6.2
1353. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=27#v.iii-p21.7
1354. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=27#v.iv-p5.11
1355. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=28#v.iv-p11.3
1356. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=29#v.iii-p22.2
1357. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=29#v.iv-p11.4
1358. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=30#v.ii-p8.23
1359. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=31#ii.vi-p75.1
1360. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=31#v.ii-p8.24
1361. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=10#v.xxv-p11.2
1362. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=0#v.v-p115.2
1363. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=14#v.xx-p3.7
1364. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=14#v.xx-p5.2
1365. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=27#v.v-p115.3
1366. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=9#v.xvii-p1.9
1367. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=26#ii.vi-p80.1
1368. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=26#v.viii-p4.8
1369. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=26#v.viii-p19.4
1370. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=20&scrV=36#v.xxi-p17.5
1371. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=43#iv.ix-p4.16
1372. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=0#v.ii-p15.14
1373. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=21#iv.x-p5.1
1374. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=26#v.ii-p13.32
1375. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=27#v.iv-p3.2
1376. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=27#v.ii-p15.15
1377. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=27#v.iii-p22.3
1378. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=27#v.iii-p23.3
1379. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=27#v.ii-p8.27
1380. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=39#v.v-p14.4
1381. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=44#v.ii-p15.16
1382. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=44#v.ii-p8.28
1383. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=45#v.ii-p8.29
1384. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=47#v.xviii-p9.3
1385. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=47#v.xviii-p12.1
1386. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v.xiv-p8.5
1387. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.vi-p6.1
1388. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.vi-p7.2
1389. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.vi-p10.1
1390. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.vi-p11.4
1391. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.vi-p16.3
1392. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v.vi-p6.2
1393. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v.vi-p7.4
1394. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v.vi-p13.1
1395. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=6#v.ii-p4.9
1396. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=6#v.xxii-p5.10
1397. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=7#v.ii-p4.10
1398. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=9#v.vi-p16.4
1399. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=12#ii.v-p42.2
1400. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iii.ii.iii-p37.2
1401. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=12#v.vi-p7.5
1402. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=12#v.xvi-p7.5
1403. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=12#v.xxi-p3.17
1404. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=13#v.xxii-p5.11
1405. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#ii.ii-p21.1
1406. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#v.xvii-p8.7
1407. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=16#v.xvi-p8.3
1408. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=16#v.xvii-p8.8
1409. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=16#v.xix-p20.2
1410. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=17#ii.ii-p17.4
1411. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=17#v.xiv-p18.4
1412. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=17#v.xvi-p8.4
1413. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=18#ii.ii-p10.6
1414. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=18#ii.ii-p12.2
1415. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=18#ii.ii-p17.5
1416. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=18#v.iii-p15.1
1417. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=18#v.vi-p8.2
1418. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=18#v.vi-p10.6
1419. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=18#v.xv-p7.3
1420. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=26#v.vii-p4.2
1421. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=29#iv.xi-p2.2
1422. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=11#v.v-p130.6
1423. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=0#v.iii-p15.2
1424. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=0#v.xv-p3.3
1425. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#ii.iv.iv-p1.4
1426. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#v.ii-p8.10
1427. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#v.iv-p13.4
1428. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.vii-p6.5
1429. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=8#v.vii-p2.1
1430. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=10#v.ii-p8.11
1431. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=15#v.xvi-p7.8
1432. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iii.ii.iii-p63.1
1433. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v.xiv-p5.2
1434. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v.v-p89.4
1435. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v.v-p100.3
1436. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v.xv-p16.1
1437. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v.xvi-p7.9
1438. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v.xviii-p7.12
1439. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=18#v.xvi-p11.1
1440. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=19#v.xiv-p5.3
1441. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=20#v.v-p49.7
1442. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=29#v.xix-p13.2
1443. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=29#v.xxii-p2.12
1444. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=32#v.iii-p15.3
1445. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=33#v.iv-p13.7
1446. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=34#ii.ii-p17.3
1447. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=34#v.iii-p10.4
1448. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=35#ii.ii-p17.6
1449. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=35#v.iii-p10.5
1450. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=36#ii.i-p59.2
1451. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=36#ii.v-p30.5
1452. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=36#iii.ii.iii-p62.4
1453. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=9#ii.vi-p28.1
1454. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=21#v.xiv-p7.10
1455. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=21#v.iv-p3.9
1456. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=22#ii.i-p32.6
1457. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=23#v.xiv-p7.11
1458. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=23#v.xv-p18.22
1459. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=24#v.v-p14.5
1460. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=24#v.vii-p3.1
1461. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=24#v.xv-p18.23
1462. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=25#v.iii-p12.2
1463. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=25#v.xv-p6.2
1464. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=38#v.iii-p11.4
1465. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=39#v.ii-p10.1
1466. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=42#v.ii-p8.33
1467. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=0#v.ii-p4.11
1468. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=0#v.ii-p7.2
1469. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=0#v.iii-p20.4
1470. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=17#v.vi-p2.7
1471. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=17#v.vi-p8.6
1472. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=17#v.vi-p13.5
1473. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=17#v.xvii-p3.7
1474. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=21#v.vi-p8.4
1475. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=22#v.xxii-p5.1
1476. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=23#v.iii-p20.5
1477. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=23#v.vi-p12.2
1478. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=23#v.xxiv-p20.1
1479. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=24#v.xx-p8.4
1480. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=25#v.xvii-p6.10
1481. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=26#v.vi-p4.2
1482. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=26#v.xxii-p5.2
1483. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=27#v.vi-p4.3
1484. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=27#v.xxii-p5.3
1485. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=32#v.ii-p8.13
1486. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=33#v.ii-p4.12
1487. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=34#v.ii-p2.8
1488. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=34#v.iv-p13.9
1489. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=36#v.ii-p2.9
1490. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=36#v.ii-p7.5
1491. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=36#v.iv-p13.1
1492. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=37#v.iv-p13.2
1493. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=39#v.iii-p21.6
1494. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=39#v.iii-p23.1
1495. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=39#v.ii-p1.2
1496. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=39#v.ii-p7.3
1497. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=46#v.ii-p7.4
1498. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=46#v.ii-p15.3
1499. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=0#v.ii-p16.13
1500. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=0#v.xvii-p6.11
1501. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=39#v.v-p77.1
1502. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=39#v.vi-p2.5
1503. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=40#v.v-p83.3
1504. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=40#v.v-p92.3
1505. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=40#v.xvi-p3.4
1506. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=44#v.xii-p10.2
1507. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=44#v.xvi-p7.18
1508. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=44#v.xvii-p6.12
1509. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=45#ii.iv.ix-p2.1
1510. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=51#ii.v-p27.2
1511. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=51#iv.xi-p2.3
1512. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=51#v.xv-p14.2
1513. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=51#v.xvi-p5.10
1514. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=53#v.vi-p2.2
1515. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=57#v.vi-p2.3
1516. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=57#v.vi-p8.1
1517. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=57#v.vi-p15.2
1518. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=67#ii.vi-p102.1
1519. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=17#v.ii-p10.6
1520. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=30#v.x-p20.1
1521. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=38#v.iii-p10.1
1522. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=39#v.iii-p10.2
1523. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=0#v.ii-p4.3
1524. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=17#ii.vi-p80.2
1525. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=24#ii.i-p59.3
1526. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=24#v.ii-p4.4
1527. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=24#v.ii-p7.1
1528. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=24#v.ii-p13.10
1529. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=24#v.xvi-p12.2
1530. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=36#v.xii-p11.9
1531. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=36#v.xxi-p3.3
1532. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=44#v.viii-p6.5
1533. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=54#v.vi-p3.2
1534. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=56#iv.x-p2.3
1535. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=56#v.xiv-p16.22
1536. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=59#v.x-p9.9
1537. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=59#v.xi-p3.13
1538. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=0#v.xvi-p12.3
1539. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=31#ii.v-p12.2
1540. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=41#v.xvi-p12.4
1541. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#v.vi-p17.2
1542. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=35#v.xxiv-p18.3
1543. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=37#ii.iv.iv-p1.1
1544. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=38#ii.iv.iv-p1.2
1545. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=0#v.xiv-p5.4
1546. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=41#v.xiv-p5.5
1547. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=31#v.xviii-p6.8
1548. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=37#v.ii-p8.26
1549. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=37#v.xvi-p11.3
1550. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=37#v.xvii-p14.11
1551. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=35#v.xxiii-p8.9
1552. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=0#v.xviii-p6.9
1553. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=2#iv.ix-p4.14
1554. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=6#ii.i-p52.3
1555. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=9#ii.i-p42.4
1556. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=16#v.vii-p4.4
1557. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=16#v.vii-p9.1
1558. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=16#v.vii-p10.1
1559. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=21#ii.iii-p8.1
1560. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=23#ii.iii-p7.1
1561. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=23#v.v-p82.3
1562. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=23#v.vi-p11.1
1563. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=26#v.iii-p7.1
1564. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=26#v.vii-p9.2
1565. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=27#ii.vi-p104.2
1566. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=30#v.xviii-p6.10
1567. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=0#v.vii-p9.3
1568. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=5#iii.vii.ii-p3.1
1569. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=15#v.iii-p7.2
1570. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=19#v.xix-p17.1
1571. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=22#v.ii-p4.1
1572. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=24#v.ii-p4.2
1573. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=26#v.iv-p13.10
1574. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=26#v.vi-p17.4
1575. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=26#v.vii-p6.2
1576. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=26#v.vii-p9.4
1577. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=26#v.vii-p9.8
1578. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=27#v.iv-p13.11
1579. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=2#ii.vi-p32.1
1580. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=2#v.ii-p16.18
1581. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=7#ii.ii-p18.4
1582. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=7#v.iii-p10.8
1583. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=8#ii.ii-p18.5
1584. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=8#v.iii-p10.9
1585. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=8#v.xviii-p9.13
1586. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=13#v.iii-p8.1
1587. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=13#v.vii-p12.3
1588. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=14#v.vi-p13.6
1589. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=0#v.xiv-p8.5
1590. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=0#v.xvi-p8.5
1591. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=1#ii.i-p61.7
1592. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=2#ii.i-p61.8
1593. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=2#ii.v-p35.2
1594. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=2#v.ii-p13.38
1595. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=2#v.xv-p17.12
1596. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=2#v.xxii-p5.4
1597. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=2#v.xxii-p6.4
1598. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=3#ii.i-p40.2
1599. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=3#ii.i-p61.9
1600. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=3#v.iii-p20.3
1601. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=4#ii.i-p61.10
1602. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=6#ii.ii-p10.8
1603. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=8#ii.ii-p10.9
1604. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=8#v.iii-p7.3
1605. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=8#v.ii-p13.39
1606. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=10#v.xxii-p6.2
1607. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=11#v.xvi-p8.6
1608. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=12#v.xvi-p8.7
1609. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=15#v.xxii-p3.1
1610. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=17#v.iii-p8.2
1611. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=21#v.xxiii-p7.5
1612. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=22#v.xvi-p8.8
1613. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=24#ii.iii-p7.2
1614. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=24#v.xxii-p5.5
1615. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=34#ii.iii-p8.2
1616. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=6#v.x-p11.1
1617. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=6#v.xi-p3.3
1618. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=6#v.xi-p5.2
1619. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=36#v.xiii-p13.4
1620. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=36#v.xv-p18.19
1621. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=37#v.xv-p5.5
1622. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=37#v.xv-p6.4
1623. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=6#v.x-p12.2
1624. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=10#v.xxvi-p1.1
1625. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=10#v.xxvi-p4.3
1626. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=10#v.xxvi-p14.5
1627. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=11#v.xxvi-p1.2
1628. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=11#v.xxvi-p4.4
1629. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=11#v.xxvi-p14.6
1630. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=22#v.vii-p7.11
1631. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=29#v.ii-p9.4
1632. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=31#ii.iii-p7.4
1633. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=31#ii.vi-p76.1
1634. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=31#v.iii-p21.3
1635. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=31#v.iv-p11.2
1636. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=17#v.vi-p11.11
1637. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=19#iv.viii-p7.3
1638. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=19#v.x-p14.12
1639. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=67&scrV=0#v.ii-p16.13
1640. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=25#v.v-p90.2
1641. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.xiii-p9.10
1642. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=16#v.iii-p10.6
1643. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=17#v.iii-p10.7
1644. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=17#v.iii-p12.1
1645. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=24#iv.viii-p6.1
1646. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=28#v.xvi-p1.1
1647. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=33#ii.ii-p18.3
1648. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=33#ii.v-p43.1
1649. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=33#v.iii-p10.3
1650. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=33#v.xv-p17.11
1651. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=33#v.xix-p20.8
1652. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=37#v.xviii-p8.2
1653. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=41#v.xix-p2.5
1654. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=41#v.xix-p12.9
1655. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=47#v.xix-p2.6
1656. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=19#v.xiv-p16.6
1657. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=20#v.xiv-p16.7
1658. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=23#ii.iii-p20.2
1659. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=25#v.xiv-p15.3
1660. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=12#v.xviii-p13.3
1661. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=12#v.xxii-p2.9
1662. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=12#v.xxiv-p12.18
1663. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=24#v.vi-p3.3
1664. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=27#v.ii-p16.15
1665. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=29#v.ii-p3.7
1666. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=30#v.ii-p3.8
1667. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=30#v.xix-p20.13
1668. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=31#v.xix-p9.3
1669. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=4#v.v-p88.12
1670. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=31#v.xviii-p7.4
1671. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=31#v.xviii-p12.2
1672. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=41#iv.viii-p3.1
1673. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=41#v.x-p14.11
1674. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=0#v.ii-p10.11
1675. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=3#ii.iv.v-p5.1
1676. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=4#ii.iv.v-p5.2
1677. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=41#v.xxiv-p2.2
1678. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=41#v.xxiv-p8.6
1679. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=41#v.xxiv-p21.2
1680. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=51#iii.ii.iii-p42.1
1681. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=51#v.ii-p10.12
1682. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=51#v.xvii-p14.3
1683. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=1#v.xxiii-p6.13
1684. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=4#v.xxiii-p6.14
1685. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=0#v.ii-p16.16
1686. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=0#v.ii-p12.2
1687. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=2#v.ii-p16.17
1688. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=2#v.ii-p12.3
1689. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=4#v.xxii-p3.9
1690. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=5#v.xxii-p3.10
1691. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=15#ii.iv.v-p3.1
1692. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=16#ii.iv.v-p3.2
1693. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=31#v.xxvi-p13.1
1694. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=48#v.xxvi-p13.2
1695. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=11&scrV=18#v.ii-p15.21
1696. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=0#v.xiv-p16.8
1697. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=0#v.xxii-p5.13
1698. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=0#v.xxiii-p6.15
1699. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=1#v.xxiii-p6.16
1700. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=2#v.xvii-p3.9
1701. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=2#v.xxii-p5.14
1702. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=2#v.xxiii-p6.17
1703. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=6#v.xxii-p10.2
1704. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=26#v.iii-p16.4
1705. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=32#v.xiv-p16.9
1706. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=33#iv.ix-p4.15
1707. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=38#v.xiv-p19.10
1708. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=39#v.xiv-p19.11
1709. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=39#v.xx-p7.5
1710. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=39#v.xx-p8.7
1711. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=46#v.ii-p10.10
1712. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=46#v.xvii-p10.4
1713. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=46#v.xvii-p14.1
1714. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=14&scrV=16#iv.xxv-p2.2
1715. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=14&scrV=16#v.v-p82.7
1716. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=14&scrV=16#v.v-p88.14
1717. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=14&scrV=16#v.x-p20.5
1718. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=14&scrV=16#v.xi-p12.5
1719. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=14&scrV=17#ii.i-p16.3
1720. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=14&scrV=17#v.v-p82.8
1721. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=0#v.xiii-p10.14
1722. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=10#v.iii-p26.3
1723. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=10#v.iv-p15.2
1724. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=10#v.xiv-p10.6
1725. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=18#v.v-p49.1
1726. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=18#v.v-p57.1
1727. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=18#v.v-p63.6
1728. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=18#v.xvi-p6.1
1729. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=18#v.xvii-p15.1
1730. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=28#v.iii-p26.4
1731. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=28#v.iv-p15.3
1732. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=28#v.xiii-p10.15
1733. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=3#v.xiii-p10.13
1734. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=3#v.xxi-p11.9
1735. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=14#v.xvii-p6.14
1736. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=14#v.xvii-p11.4
1737. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=14#v.xix-p16.1
1738. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=16#v.ii-p16.4
1739. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=17#v.ii-p16.5
1740. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=17#v.xix-p11.7
1741. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=0#v.x-p20.6
1742. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=0#v.xi-p12.6
1743. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=0#v.xvi-p1.2
1744. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=0#v.xviii-p7.5
1745. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=11#iv.vii-p4.4
1746. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=11#v.ii-p12.4
1747. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=25#v.v-p81.6
1748. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=25#v.v-p122.4
1749. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=26#v.v-p81.7
1750. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=26#v.xvi-p1.3
1751. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=27#ii.i-p16.1
1752. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=27#v.v-p31.4
1753. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=28#ii.i-p16.2
1754. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=28#v.v-p6.4
1755. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=28#v.v-p31.5
1756. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=28#v.v-p45.5
1757. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=28#v.v-p123.4
1758. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=28#v.vi-p1.2
1759. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=29#ii.i-p34.4
1760. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=29#v.v-p16.5
1761. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=29#v.v-p123.5
1762. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=30#v.x-p20.7
1763. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=30#v.xi-p12.7
1764. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=30#v.xviii-p7.6
1765. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=18&scrV=28#v.iii-p24.6
1766. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=9#iv.xvi-p4.1
1767. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=10#iv.xvi-p4.2
1768. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=0#v.xvii-p3.10
1769. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=26#v.iv-p8.2
1770. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=27#v.iv-p8.3
1771. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=27#v.iii-p17.2
1772. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=27#v.iii-p19.11
1773. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=27#v.xvi-p3.6
1774. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=28#v.ii-p17.14
1775. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=28#v.vii-p7.8
1776. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=28#v.xv-p15.10
1777. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=28#v.xvii-p3.11
1778. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=28#v.xix-p2.3
1779. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=28#v.xxii-p2.2
1780. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=28#v.xxii-p5.12
1781. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=21&scrV=0#v.xiii-p10.16
1782. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=21&scrV=21#v.xiii-p10.17
1783. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=23&scrV=0#v.v-p67.3
1784. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=23&scrV=3#v.ix-p5.8
1785. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=23&scrV=10#v.x-p9.10
1786. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=23&scrV=11#v.v-p67.4
1787. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=25&scrV=1#v.xxvi-p14.7
1788. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=25&scrV=10#v.xxvi-p14.8
1789. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=22#v.iii-p20.23
1790. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=22#v.ii-p12.1
1791. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=22#v.iii-p19.12
1792. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=23#v.iii-p20.24
1793. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=27#v.iii-p22.1
1794. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=27&scrV=22#v.v-p67.1
1795. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=27&scrV=29#v.v-p84.8
1796. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=27&scrV=31#v.v-p67.2
1797. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=27&scrV=31#v.v-p84.9
1798. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=0#ii.i-p32.4
1799. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v.xi-p16.1
1800. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v.xi-p16.7
1801. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v.xv-p7.10
1802. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.ii-p3.1
1803. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.xv-p7.11
1804. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v.xv-p7.12
1805. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v.xix-p6.9
1806. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v.iii-p20.22
1807. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v.iii-p23.2
1808. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=5#v.ii-p1.4
1809. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=5#v.xvii-p12.3
1810. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=16#ii.i-p60.4
1811. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=16#v.iii-p16.5
1812. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=16#v.xiv-p10.5
1813. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=16#v.xx-p10.1
1814. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=17#v.xx-p10.2
1815. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=19#ii.ii-p5.9
1816. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=20#v.v-p4.4
1817. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=20#v.x-p1.3
1818. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=21#v.xii-p8.2
1819. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=22#v.xii-p8.3
1820. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=23#v.v-p16.3
1821. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=23#v.v-p33.4
1822. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=23#v.v-p129.1
1823. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=23#v.xxiv-p21.7
1824. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=24#v.x-p23.8
1825. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=24#v.xi-p14.9
1826. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=24#v.xxiv-p8.15
1827. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=28#v.x-p23.6
1828. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=28#v.xi-p14.7
1829. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=0#v.iv-p3.10
1830. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=0#v.xx-p4.1
1831. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=0#v.xx-p5.1
1832. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=0#v.xx-p5.7
1833. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=2#v.v-p64.3
1834. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=4#v.v-p109.5
1835. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=4#v.xviii-p10.5
1836. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=5#v.v-p109.6
1837. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=5#v.xviii-p8.1
1838. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=7#v.xiii-p5.10
1839. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v.xiii-p4.1
1840. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v.xiii-p2.1
1841. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=15#v.xiii-p2.2
1842. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=16#ii.ii-p21.4
1843. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=16#v.xx-p5.3
1844. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=26#v.iv-p3.11
1845. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=27#v.iv-p3.12
1846. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=0#v.xiv-p19.4
1847. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=0#v.xx-p4.1
1848. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=0#v.xx-p5.1
1849. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=0#v.xx-p5.7
1850. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=0#v.xx-p6.6
1851. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=0#v.xx-p8.6
1852. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=0#v.xx-p8.9
1853. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=0#v.xx-p10.5
1854. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=4#ii.i-p59.1
1855. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=4#v.ii-p2.2
1856. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=4#v.v-p108.4
1857. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=4#v.xx-p8.10
1858. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.xx-p8.11
1859. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=10#v.xx-p8.12
1860. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=10#v.xii-p11.1
1861. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=11#v.xx-p8.13
1862. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=13#v.xviii-p9.4
1863. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=19#v.xiii-p4.6
1864. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=20#v.xiii-p4.7
1865. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=20#v.xviii-p9.5
1866. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=20#v.xx-p8.1
1867. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=24#v.xviii-p12.3
1868. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=24#v.xv-p15.3
1869. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=24#v.xiv-p5.10
1870. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=24#v.xx-p8.8
1871. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=25#ii.i-p52.1
1872. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=25#v.xv-p16.5
1873. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=27#v.xiv-p4.2
1874. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=27#v.ix-p2.1
1875. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=27#v.xiv-p19.5
1876. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=27#v.xx-p5.6
1877. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=27#v.xx-p6.7
1878. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=28#v.xx-p8.2
1879. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=0#iii.vii.iv-p3.1
1880. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=0#iv.ii.i-p2.4
1881. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=0#v.xiii-p4.4
1882. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=0#v.xiv-p16.2
1883. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=0#v.xx-p4.1
1884. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=0#v.xx-p5.7
1885. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=0#v.xx-p8.6
1886. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=0#v.xx-p10.5
1887. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=2#v.xiv-p16.10
1888. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=2#v.xvi-p12.1
1889. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=3#v.xiv-p16.11
1890. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iv.xxi-p5.1
1891. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v.xiv-p5.1
1892. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v.xiii-p4.5
1893. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v.xiv-p19.2
1894. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v.xv-p7.4
1895. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v.xx-p6.5
1896. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v.xx-p9.3
1897. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=5#v.xiv-p19.3
1898. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=5#v.xx-p9.4
1899. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iv.ii.ii-p2.1
1900. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=13#v.xiv-p16.21
1901. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=14#v.xx-p9.1
1902. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=15#v.xv-p10.4
1903. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=15#v.xx-p9.2
1904. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=17#ii.i-p14.1
1905. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=19#v.ii-p8.6
1906. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=20#v.v-p118.3
1907. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=21#v.v-p118.4
1908. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=25#v.xv-p16.2
1909. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=0#v.xviii-p10.6
1910. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=0#v.xx-p4.1
1911. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=2#v.xxi-p3.18
1912. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=3#v.xviii-p10.7
1913. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=4#v.xviii-p10.8
1914. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=6#v.xxi-p3.8
1915. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=8#v.v-p101.3
1916. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=8#v.v-p102.3
1917. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=9#v.xv-p15.11
1918. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=12#v.viii-p4.6
1919. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=12#v.viii-p20.1
1920. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=12#v.viii-p20.3
1921. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=12#v.xix-p5.2
1922. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=14#v.xix-p5.3
1923. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=15#v.ii-p13.17
1924. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=15#v.viii-p3.3
1925. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=16#v.viii-p4.7
1926. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=18#v.viii-p3.1
1927. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=18#v.viii-p20.4
1928. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=19#v.viii-p3.2
1929. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=19#v.viii-p4.2
1930. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=19#v.viii-p6.2
1931. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=19#v.viii-p20.5
1932. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=20#v.xiv-p11.4
1933. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=0#iv.xxiii-p3.1
1934. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=0#v.xix-p9.8
1935. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=5#v.xix-p9.9
1936. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=6#v.x-p9.4
1937. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=6#v.xi-p3.10
1938. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=6#v.xii-p13.1
1939. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=7#v.xviii-p6.16
1940. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=9#v.xviii-p6.15
1941. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=10#ii.v-p33.5
1942. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=10#v.xviii-p6.19
1943. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=12#v.xiii-p4.13
1944. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=13#v.xviii-p5.5
1945. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=14#v.xxi-p7.1
1946. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=16#v.xii-p6.1
1947. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=17#v.xvii-p8.3
1948. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=18#v.xvii-p8.4
1949. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=18#v.xxi-p4.7
1950. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=19#v.xviii-p5.6
1951. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=20#v.xii-p10.4
1952. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=22#v.xxi-p4.5
1953. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=23#iii.ii.iii-p38.1
1954. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=23#v.v-p44.3
1955. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=23#v.viii-p19.3
1956. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=23#v.ix-p8.1
1957. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=0#v.xiii-p4.8
1958. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=0#v.xiii-p4.14
1959. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=0#v.xviii-p9.6
1960. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=0#v.xix-p11.4
1961. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=0#v.xxi-p3.9
1962. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=2#v.xxi-p3.10
1963. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=3#v.xxi-p3.11
1964. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=4#v.xiii-p7.8
1965. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=5#v.xiii-p4.15
1966. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=6#v.xviii-p7.18
1967. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=7#v.xviii-p7.19
1968. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=7#v.xviii-p9.7
1969. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=8#v.xiii-p4.16
1970. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=10#ii.i-p36.1
1971. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=11#v.xiii-p4.17
1972. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=12#v.iii-p1.4
1973. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=13#v.xiii-p4.18
1974. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=1#v.xv-p18.20
1975. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=2#v.vii-p6.6
1976. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=3#v.xiii-p5.3
1977. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=3#v.xiii-p7.2
1978. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=3#v.xxi-p7.2
1979. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=5#v.ii-p13.15
1980. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=7#v.xii-p9.1
1981. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=7#v.xii-p10.3
1982. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=9#v.xxii-p2.5
1983. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=9#v.xxiii-p7.10
1984. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=9#v.vi-p17.3
1985. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=9#v.xix-p13.8
1986. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=9#v.xix-p20.6
1987. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=10#v.v-p45.6
1988. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=11#v.v-p45.7
1989. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=11#v.vii-p6.7
1990. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=12#v.ii-p13.3
1991. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=13#v.ii-p13.4
1992. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=14#v.viii-p19.5
1993. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=14#v.xxii-p5.15
1994. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=15#v.viii-p19.6
1995. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=15#v.xiv-p16.16
1996. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=15#v.xiv-p18.9
1997. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=15#v.xxi-p3.12
1998. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=15#v.xxi-p10.4
1999. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=15#v.xxi-p17.1
2000. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=15#v.xxii-p2.6
2001. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=15#v.xxi-p17.4
2002. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=16#ii.i-p54.1
2003. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=16#v.ii-p17.17
2004. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=16#v.xii-p12.6
2005. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=16#v.xxi-p3.13
2006. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=16#v.xxii-p2.7
2007. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=26#v.x-p23.3
2008. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=28#v.xvii-p8.9
2009. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=28#v.xix-p9.7
2010. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=28#v.xix-p12.7
2011. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=29#v.ii-p13.33
2012. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=29#v.xvi-p1.4
2013. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=29#v.xvi-p7.2
2014. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=29#v.xvi-p14.1
2015. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=30#v.xvi-p7.3
2016. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=30#v.xvi-p14.2
2017. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=32#v.vi-p10.5
2018. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=34#ii.v-p34.4
2019. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=34#v.xv-p10.17
2020. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=34#v.xv-p14.3
2021. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=34#v.xv-p15.13
2022. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=34#v.xxv-p13.2
2023. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=0#ii.iv.vi-p2.4
2024. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=0#v.v-p129.2
2025. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=0#v.xvi-p2.2
2026. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=0#v.xx-p5.7
2027. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=0#v.xx-p9.5
2028. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=1#v.xvi-p10.2
2029. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=4#v.v-p129.3
2030. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=4#v.xiv-p16.4
2031. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=4#v.xiv-p16.14
2032. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=5#v.v-p18.8
2033. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=5#v.vi-p10.2
2034. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=6#v.xvi-p10.1
2035. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=7#v.xiv-p16.18
2036. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=8#v.xiv-p16.12
2037. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=11#iv.iii-p6.1
2038. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=11#iv.xxv-p2.1
2039. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=11#v.v-p81.13
2040. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=11#v.xvi-p3.1
2041. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=11#v.xvi-p14.6
2042. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=17#v.iii-p22.4
2043. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=17#v.iv-p11.6
2044. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=19#v.v-p88.7
2045. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=19#v.v-p117.6
2046. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=21#v.xvii-p7.1
2047. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=22#v.viii-p15.3
2048. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=22#v.xvi-p11.6
2049. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=23#v.viii-p15.4
2050. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=30#v.xx-p9.6
2051. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=32#v.xvi-p7.13
2052. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=33#v.vi-p14.9
2053. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=0#v.ii-p6.13
2054. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=0#v.xiii-p4.2
2055. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=0#v.xvii-p7.2
2056. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=3#v.xx-p9.7
2057. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=4#iv.ii.i-p2.3
2058. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=4#v.xv-p7.9
2059. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=4#v.iii-p21.1
2060. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=5#v.xiv-p4.1
2061. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=5#v.xiii-p4.3
2062. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=5#v.xvi-p3.3
2063. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=5#v.xx-p6.4
2064. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=7#ii.iv.ix-p5.1
2065. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=8#v.ii-p6.4
2066. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=8#v.iii-p16.1
2067. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=8#v.ii-p6.14
2068. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=9#v.ii-p13.11
2069. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=9#v.xvi-p3.5
2070. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=9#v.xix-p16.3
2071. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=10#ii.vi-p65.1
2072. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=10#v.xvii-p12.4
2073. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=10#v.xix-p16.4
2074. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=10#v.xxiii-p8.7
2075. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=12#v.ii-p18.4
2076. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=13#v.xxiii-p8.8
2077. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=13#v.xvii-p2.6
2078. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=14#ii.i-p40.1
2079. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=14#v.ii-p6.15
2080. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=14#v.v-p4.5
2081. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=14#v.xvii-p13.3
2082. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=15#v.xxiii-p8.5
2083. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=17#v.iv-p4.4
2084. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=17#v.ii-p6.5
2085. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=17#v.xxiii-p8.6
2086. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=17#v.xvii-p7.3
2087. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=20#v.x-p12.3
2088. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=21#v.x-p12.4
2089. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=0#v.xvii-p7.4
2090. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=0#v.xx-p5.7
2091. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=1#v.v-p81.11
2092. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=5#v.xviii-p7.7
2093. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=17#v.xxiii-p8.3
2094. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=25#v.xvii-p7.5
2095. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=29#v.xvii-p7.6
2096. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=32#v.iii-p22.7
2097. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=33#ii.ii-p7.3
2098. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=33#v.v-p48.1
2099. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=33#v.v-p66.3
2100. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=33#v.v-p67.5
2101. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=33#v.vi-p2.4
2102. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=34#v.v-p66.4
2103. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=34#v.xvi-p4.5
2104. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=34#v.ii-p2.10
2105. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=35#v.v-p18.5
2106. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=35#v.v-p20.1
2107. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=35#v.v-p89.3
2108. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=35#v.v-p123.1
2109. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=35#v.xvi-p4.6
2110. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=36#v.v-p18.6
2111. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=36#v.v-p20.2
2112. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=36#v.v-p23.4
2113. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=36#v.v-p80.3
2114. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=36#v.v-p123.2
2115. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=36#v.xvi-p9.2
2116. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=36#v.xix-p14.2
2117. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=0#v.v-p81.14
2118. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=0#v.xiii-p3.6
2119. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=0#v.xviii-p10.9
2120. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=1#ii.v-p55.1
2121. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=1#v.xviii-p5.2
2122. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=2#v.xviii-p5.3
2123. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=3#v.xxii-p5.16
2124. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=3#v.xxii-p7.7
2125. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=4#v.v-p81.15
2126. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=4#v.xxiii-p6.6
2127. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=4#v.xxvi-p3.4
2128. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=4#v.xxii-p3.13
2129. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=5#v.xxiii-p7.4
2130. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=5#v.xxvi-p3.5
2131. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=8#v.xv-p18.21
2132. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=9#v.ii-p17.4
2133. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=11#v.xviii-p10.10
2134. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=12#v.xviii-p10.11
2135. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=0#v.ii-p2.11
2136. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=0#v.xiii-p3.6
2137. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=0#v.xxi-p11.3
2138. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=1#v.ii-p2.12
2139. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=1#v.xxvi-p1.4
2140. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=1#v.xxvi-p4.1
2141. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=1#v.xxvi-p7.1
2142. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=1#v.xxvi-p14.1
2143. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=1#v.xxvi-p2.1
2144. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=2#v.xxvi-p4.2
2145. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=4#v.xxvi-p5.2
2146. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=4#v.xxvi-p7.5
2147. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=5#v.xxvi-p7.6
2148. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=5#v.xxvi-p14.11
2149. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=6#v.xxvi-p7.7
2150. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=0#v.xxi-p11.4
2151. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=3#v.xxi-p13.2
2152. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=5#v.xxi-p11.1
2153. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=10#v.xxi-p13.3
2154. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=14#v.xxi-p11.2
2155. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=15#iv.xi-p2.4
2156. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=15#v.ix-p3.2
2157. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=21#v.ix-p3.3
2158. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=4#v.ii-p6.8
2159. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=4#v.iii-p20.8
2160. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=19#v.ii-p16.24
2161. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=5#v.xix-p2.7
2162. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=17#v.ii-p6.12
2163. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=25#ii.i-p44.4
2164. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=25#ii.ii-p10.3
2165. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=26#ii.ii-p10.4
2166. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iv.vii-p4.2
2167. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v.ii-p17.6
2168. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=5#v.xvii-p11.1
2169. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=6#v.iv-p13.6
2170. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=9#v.xvi-p14.5
2171. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=9#v.xvii-p2.9
2172. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=17#v.xvii-p4.5
2173. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=18#ii.vi-p37.1
2174. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=18#v.ii-p13.5
2175. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=18#v.xii-p8.8
2176. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=18#v.xvii-p4.6
2177. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=20#v.ii-p10.7
2178. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=20#v.xiv-p5.8
2179. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=21#ii.i-p60.1
2180. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=21#iii.ii.iii-p22.1
2181. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=21#v.iii-p16.2
2182. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=21#iv.ii.ii-p2.3
2183. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=23#ii.i-p60.2
2184. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=23#v.ii-p10.15
2185. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=24#ii.i-p60.3
2186. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=24#ii.i-p43.2
2187. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=24#v.ii-p17.7
2188. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=24#v.ii-p10.16
2189. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=24#v.ii-p13.6
2190. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=24#v.xii-p8.9
2191. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=25#v.v-p5.7
2192. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=27#v.ii-p10.8
2193. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=28#v.iv-p4.5
2194. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=29#v.ii-p19.2
2195. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=30#v.iii-p18.3
2196. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=30#v.xviii-p7.9
2197. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=30#v.xviii-p13.6
2198. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=31#v.iii-p18.4
2199. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=31#v.xviii-p7.10
2200. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iv.ii.ii-p2.4
2201. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=0#v.ii-p13.7
2202. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=0#v.xxvi-p4.9
2203. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=2#ii.i-p45.1
2204. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=2#v.ii-p13.8
2205. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iv.ii.ii-p2.5
2206. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=6#v.iii-p15.6
2207. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=7#ii.i-p44.3
2208. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=7#ii.ii-p10.1
2209. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=7#ii.ii-p12.3
2210. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=7#ii.iv.ix-p1.3
2211. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=8#ii.ii-p12.4
2212. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=8#v.ii-p16.14
2213. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=8#v.vi-p10.10
2214. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=9#ii.ii-p12.5
2215. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v.v-p126.3
2216. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=10#ii.ii-p10.2
2217. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=10#ii.iv.ix-p1.4
2218. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.iv-p4.3
2219. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.iii-p9.1
2220. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.v-p126.4
2221. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.vii-p4.5
2222. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.vii-p6.8
2223. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.vii-p12.1
2224. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.iv-p5.2
2225. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=11#ii.iv.ix-p1.1
2226. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=11#v.v-p3.3
2227. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=11#v.v-p52.1
2228. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=11#v.v-p88.4
2229. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=11#v.vii-p4.6
2230. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=11#v.vii-p6.1
2231. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=11#v.vii-p12.2
2232. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=12#v.iv-p2.1
2233. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=12#v.ii-p17.5
2234. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=12#v.v-p88.5
2235. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=12#v.viii-p19.7
2236. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v.iv-p2.2
2237. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=13#ii.iv.ii-p4.1
2238. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v.ii-p13.9
2239. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v.xii-p8.1
2240. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=15#v.xxiii-p18.1
2241. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=16#v.iii-p9.3
2242. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=18#v.iii-p15.5
2243. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=0#v.iv-p5.3
2244. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=0#v.xvii-p11.2
2245. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=3#v.xvii-p11.3
2246. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.xvii-p12.1
2247. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.xix-p10.5
2248. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.xxii-p14.1
2249. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.xxii-p4.9
2250. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.xxii-p5.18
2251. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v.xvii-p12.2
2252. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v.xxii-p7.12
2253. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=7#v.ii-p17.1
2254. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=7#v.iv-p5.4
2255. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=9#iii.ii.iii-p66.1
2256. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=9#v.ii-p5.2
2257. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=10#v.iv-p2.3
2258. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=10#v.ii-p5.3
2259. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=10#v.xix-p10.6
2260. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=18#ii.i-p44.1
2261. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=3#iii.vii.i-p2.2
2262. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v.xx-p10.13
2263. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=6#ii.iv.viii-p1.4
2264. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=6#v.iii-p19.10
2265. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=6#v.iv-p11.1
2266. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=7#v.v-p123.3
2267. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=7#v.xiii-p8.8
2268. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=9#v.iv-p5.6
2269. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=9#v.xii-p11.2
2270. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=17#v.xxii-p3.2
2271. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=19#v.vii-p12.9
2272. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=19#v.xxii-p3.3
2273. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=20#v.xiii-p5.11
2274. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=19#v.xiii-p10.8
2275. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=28#v.v-p88.13
2276. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=0#ii.i-p32.5
2277. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=0#v.xxi-p11.5
2278. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=4#v.xxiv-p2.5
2279. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=4#v.v-p18.7
2280. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=6#v.vi-p13.3
2281. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=0#v.xiii-p10.9
2282. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=0#v.xxi-p11.6
2283. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=19#v.xiii-p10.10
2284. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=20#v.xiii-p10.11
2285. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=0#v.xxi-p11.7
2286. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=7#v.xxiv-p4.3
2287. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=9#v.vi-p14.2
2288. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=13#v.x-p21.3
2289. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=13#v.xi-p12.10
2290. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=16#v.iv-p8.10
2291. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=16#v.xxiii-p6.2
2292. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=16#v.xxiv-p11.2
2293. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=17#v.iii-p18.13
2294. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=17#v.iv-p8.11
2295. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=17#v.xxiii-p6.3
2296. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=19#v.xxiv-p3.8
2297. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=20#v.xxiv-p1.3
2298. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=20#v.xxiv-p3.9
2299. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=20#v.xxiv-p9.8
2300. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=27#v.xxi-p11.8
2301. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=31#v.v-p39.3
2302. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=0#v.xxiv-p11.3
2303. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=23#v.ii-p3.5
2304. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=25#v.xxiv-p11.4
2305. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=30#iv.viii-p3.2
2306. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=32#v.x-p24.4
2307. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=32#v.xi-p15.4
2308. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=32#v.xviii-p10.1
2309. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=34#v.iii-p25.1
2310. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=34#v.iv-p14.1
2311. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=0#v.ii-p17.8
2312. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=0#v.xxii-p14.2
2313. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=3#ii.iv.ix-p1.2
2314. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=3#v.ii-p17.9
2315. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=3#v.ii-p7.6
2316. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=4#v.vii-p8.3
2317. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=4#v.xvii-p3.12
2318. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=4#v.xxii-p3.14
2319. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=4#v.xxii-p7.1
2320. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=5#v.xxii-p7.2
2321. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=6#v.xxii-p3.15
2322. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=7#v.xvii-p3.13
2323. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=9#v.xvii-p3.14
2324. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=11#v.vii-p6.9
2325. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=11#v.vii-p13.1
2326. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=11#v.xvii-p3.15
2327. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=12#v.xxiii-p6.7
2328. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=12#v.xxiii-p7.1
2329. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=12#v.xxiii-p10.2
2330. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=12#v.xxvi-p3.6
2331. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=13#v.xxiii-p6.8
2332. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=13#v.xxiii-p7.2
2333. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=13#v.xxiii-p10.3
2334. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=17#v.xxiii-p10.4
2335. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=28#v.xxii-p14.3
2336. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=28#v.xvii-p5.2
2337. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=1#v.ii-p13.13
2338. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=9#v.ii-p8.2
2339. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=9#v.v-p3.5
2340. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=10#v.iii-p1.1
2341. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=11#iv.x-p2.2
2342. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=12#iv.xviii-p6.2
2343. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=12#v.ii-p8.3
2344. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=12#v.v-p4.1
2345. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=5#v.iii-p26.5
2346. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=26#v.iii-p26.6
2347. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=32#v.iii-p26.8
2348. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=32#v.iv-p15.4
2349. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=33#v.iii-p26.9
2350. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=33#v.iv-p15.5
2351. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=33#v.xxiii-p6.10
2352. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=33#v.xxvi-p4.8
2353. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=33#v.xxvi-p5.8
2354. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=40#v.iii-p26.1
2355. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=40#v.iv-p14.2
2356. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=1#v.iii-p17.3
2357. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=1#v.xvii-p13.5
2358. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=2#v.iii-p17.4
2359. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=10#v.xix-p21.8
2360. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=10#v.xxii-p4.10
2361. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=20#iv.ix-p4.5
2362. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=21#ii.iii-p2.1
2363. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=21#iv.viii-p5.3
2364. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=24#ii.iii-p6.1
2365. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=24#ii.v-p49.2
2366. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=24#v.xxvi-p5.12
2367. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=27#v.xxii-p5.6
2368. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=28#v.iii-p1.2
2369. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=28#v.v-p45.8
2370. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=28#v.v-p127.1
2371. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=32#v.xxvi-p5.11
2372. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=49#ii.iii-p15.2
2373. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=55#v.xiii-p7.6
2374. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=56#v.xiii-p7.7
2375. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=1#v.xxiii-p7.17
2376. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=2#v.xxiii-p7.18
2377. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=19#v.xxiii-p7.19
2378. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v.ii-p16.7
2379. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=19#ii.vi-p61.1
2380. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=20#v.iv-p5.1
2381. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=21#v.xxii-p2.3
2382. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=22#v.ii-p17.11
2383. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=22#v.ii-p8.30
2384. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=22#v.xxi-p17.7
2385. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=22#v.xxii-p2.4
2386. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=4#v.ii-p7.7
2387. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=5#v.ii-p7.8
2388. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iii.ii.iii-p67.1
2389. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=16#ii.v-p4.1
2390. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=17#ii.vi-p45.3
2391. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=0#ii.vi-p40.2
2392. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=0#v.ii-p7.9
2393. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=3#v.xiv-p9.4
2394. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=3#v.xvii-p11.5
2395. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=3#v.xvii-p13.4
2396. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=4#ii.iv-p17.2
2397. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.xxii-p7.8
2398. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v.iii-p11.1
2399. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v.iii-p20.12
2400. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v.xxii-p7.9
2401. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v.xiv-p11.1
2402. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=7#v.ii-p7.10
2403. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=8#ii.i-p44.2
2404. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=9#v.iv-p6.7
2405. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=9#v.iii-p16.3
2406. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=10#v.iii-p13.3
2407. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=10#v.xiv-p13.7
2408. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=11#v.iii-p13.4
2409. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=11#v.ii-p7.12
2410. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=12#v.ii-p7.13
2411. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=13#iv.ii.i-p2.2
2412. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=13#v.xiii-p10.12
2413. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iv.ii.i-p3.2
2414. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=17#v.iii-p12.6
2415. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=17#v.xii-p11.8
2416. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=17#v.xxi-p3.5
2417. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=18#v.iii-p12.7
2418. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=18#v.v-p4.8
2419. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=18#v.v-p123.6
2420. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=18#v.viii-p8.1
2421. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=18#v.xiv-p18.3
2422. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=18#v.xxi-p3.6
2423. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=0#v.ii-p16.12
2424. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=0#v.x-p23.9
2425. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=2#v.ii-p19.1
2426. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=3#ii.iv.v-p7.1
2427. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=3#v.ii-p10.13
2428. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=4#ii.iv.v-p7.2
2429. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=4#ii.vi-p40.1
2430. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v.iii-p13.1
2431. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v.ii-p10.14
2432. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v.xi-p14.10
2433. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v.xvii-p14.5
2434. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v.xxiv-p9.10
2435. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=6#v.iv-p5.5
2436. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=6#v.x-p13.3
2437. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=6#v.xi-p6.3
2438. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=8#v.x-p21.4
2439. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=9#v.x-p21.5
2440. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=13#ii.vi-p65.3
2441. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=13#v.xii-p12.5
2442. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=13#v.xiv-p16.13
2443. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=16#v.xii-p13.2
2444. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=16#v.xvii-p12.5
2445. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=16#v.xix-p16.2
2446. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=6#v.v-p4.9
2447. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=7#ii.i-p24.1
2448. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=11#v.ii-p19.3
2449. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=17#ii.iii-p15.3
2450. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=17#v.xiv-p7.3
2451. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=19#v.ii-p17.16
2452. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=19#v.ii-p13.18
2453. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=19#v.xiv-p5.7
2454. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=19#v.xv-p15.2
2455. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=19#v.xv-p16.3
2456. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=19#v.xvi-p5.4
2457. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=19#v.xx-p11.1
2458. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=19#v.xxi-p3.16
2459. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=21#iv.xxi-p4.1
2460. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=21#v.xvi-p5.5
2461. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=21#v.xviii-p7.11
2462. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=21#v.xx-p11.2
2463. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=1#iii.ii.iii-p42.2
2464. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=2#v.xvii-p1.10
2465. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=7#v.iii-p16.7
2466. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=10#iii.ii.iii-p55.1
2467. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=8#v.xxvi-p4.10
2468. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=5#ii.vi-p43.1
2469. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=5#v.ii-p1.5
2470. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=6#v.ii-p1.6
2471. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=2#v.xxii-p2.11
2472. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=3#v.viii-p6.7
2473. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=3#v.xxiii-p9.1
2474. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=15#v.xix-p17.3
2475. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=0#v.ii-p1.9
2476. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=11#v.xix-p21.7
2477. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=12#ii.iv.iv-p1.5
2478. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=12#v.ii-p1.10
2479. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=0#v.ii-p1.7
2480. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=3#v.ii-p1.8
2481. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=10#v.iii-p26.7
2482. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=13#v.vii-p8.4
2483. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=14#v.vii-p14.1
2484. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.ii-p1.11
2485. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.ii-p2.5
2486. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.xix-p21.4
2487. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=4#v.xvii-p2.5
2488. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=6#v.xxiii-p9.2
2489. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=7#v.ii-p2.6
2490. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=7#v.iii-p18.1
2491. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=7#v.xxii-p15.2
2492. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v.iv-p8.4
2493. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v.ii-p2.7
2494. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v.ii-p4.5
2495. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=9#v.iv-p8.5
2496. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=9#v.ii-p4.6
2497. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=12#v.ii-p1.12
2498. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=13#v.ii-p1.13
2499. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=13#v.x-p14.9
2500. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=0#v.xx-p4.2
2501. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=0#v.xx-p5.8
2502. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=3#v.xiii-p10.18
2503. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=7#v.xix-p21.6
2504. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v.iv-p10.2
2505. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=11#v.xiii-p10.19
2506. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=12#v.xiii-p10.20
2507. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=15#v.xiv-p19.12
2508. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=15#v.xix-p12.1
2509. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=16#iv.xxii-p8.2
2510. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=16#v.viii-p1.2
2511. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=16#v.xiii-p4.9
2512. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=16#v.xiv-p19.13
2513. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=16#v.xix-p12.2
2514. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=16#v.xx-p7.9
2515. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=16#v.xx-p8.3
2516. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=17#v.xiii-p2.3
2517. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=17#v.xiii-p4.10
2518. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=17#v.xiv-p19.1
2519. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=20#v.xvi-p7.14
2520. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=20#v.xvii-p2.10
2521. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=20#v.xxii-p3.7
2522. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=20#v.xxii-p5.9
2523. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=20#v.xxvi-p5.10
2524. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=21#v.xix-p12.3
2525. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=30#v.xix-p13.7
2526. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=0#v.xiv-p10.2
2527. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=0#v.xx-p4.2
2528. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=0#v.xx-p5.8
2529. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=1#v.xix-p17.4
2530. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=1#v.xxiii-p9.7
2531. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=2#v.xix-p6.4
2532. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.xix-p6.5
2533. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v.xx-p10.3
2534. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=7#v.xx-p10.4
2535. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=8#ii.i-p61.3
2536. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=8#v.iii-p22.8
2537. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=8#v.iv-p11.7
2538. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=9#ii.i-p61.4
2539. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=10#v.xx-p9.8
2540. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=10#v.xiii-p7.5
2541. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=13#v.xiv-p18.6
2542. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=13#v.xv-p15.7
2543. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=15#v.iii-p11.2
2544. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=15#v.iii-p20.13
2545. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v.xiv-p15.2
2546. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v.xiv-p15.6
2547. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v.xiv-p18.2
2548. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v.xiii-p7.3
2549. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=17#v.xiv-p15.4
2550. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=17#v.xiv-p15.7
2551. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=17#v.xv-p7.6
2552. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=18#v.xiv-p16.15
2553. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=19#v.xiv-p8.1
2554. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=19#v.xiv-p8.6
2555. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=19#v.xiii-p2.6
2556. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=19#v.xiv-p13.5
2557. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=19#v.xiv-p19.9
2558. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=21#v.xiii-p7.1
2559. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=21#v.xiv-p10.3
2560. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=21#v.xxi-p9.1
2561. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=21#v.xx-p7.10
2562. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=22#v.iii-p22.6
2563. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=22#v.xiii-p7.4
2564. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=23#iv.ii.i-p2.1
2565. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=24#ii.i-p43.1
2566. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=24#v.xiii-p9.6
2567. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=25#v.xiv-p18.7
2568. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=26#v.xxi-p3.19
2569. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=26#v.xxi-p4.3
2570. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=0#v.xix-p6.6
2571. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=0#v.xix-p7.1
2572. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=1#v.iii-p20.17
2573. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iv.ii.i-p3.1
2574. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=1#v.xiii-p8.1
2575. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=1#v.xxi-p6.4
2576. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=1#v.xix-p6.10
2577. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=1#v.xix-p8.4
2578. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=1#v.iii-p12.5
2579. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=1#v.xiv-p18.8
2580. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=2#v.iii-p20.18
2581. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=3#iv.x-p2.1
2582. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v.xxi-p10.5
2583. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=5#ii.v-p42.1
2584. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=5#v.xvi-p5.7
2585. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=5#v.xxi-p17.2
2586. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=6#v.vi-p1.1
2587. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=6#v.vii-p9.6
2588. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=6#v.vii-p9.7
2589. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=6#v.xiv-p18.10
2590. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=6#v.xvi-p5.9
2591. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=6#v.xvi-p7.6
2592. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=6#v.xxi-p4.2
2593. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=6#v.xxi-p17.3
2594. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=6#v.xxi-p17.6
2595. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=7#v.xvi-p7.7
2596. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=8#v.v-p2.1
2597. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=8#v.xxiv-p3.2
2598. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=8#v.xxiv-p18.6
2599. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=9#v.xiii-p10.6
2600. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=9#v.xiv-p10.1
2601. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=10#v.xiii-p10.7
2602. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=16#ii.vi-p53.1
2603. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=18#v.xiii-p7.11
2604. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=19#v.xvi-p5.8
2605. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=19#v.xix-p6.7
2606. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=23#v.xiv-p11.2
2607. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=24#v.xiv-p11.3
2608. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=24#v.xxi-p8.2
2609. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=24#v.xiv-p8.18
2610. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=25#v.xxi-p8.3
2611. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=26#v.iii-p18.9
2612. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=26#v.xxiii-p6.12
2613. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=26#v.xix-p7.3
2614. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=28#v.xiv-p16.20
2615. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=31#v.xiv-p16.19
2616. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=0#v.xx-p4.2
2617. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=0#v.xx-p5.8
2618. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=1#v.xxi-p3.4
2619. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=13#v.xxi-p13.1
2620. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=13#v.xxiv-p18.7
2621. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=17#v.x-p9.7
2622. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=17#v.xi-p3.12
2623. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=17#v.xii-p13.3
2624. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=19#v.ix-p7.1
2625. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=19#v.xii-p11.3
2626. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=0#v.xxiii-p9.8
2627. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=16#ii.vi-p105.2
2628. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=16#v.ii-p6.9
2629. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v.iii-p18.11
2630. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v.xvi-p2.1
2631. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v.xvi-p14.3
2632. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v.xiv-p7.13
2633. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v.vi-p1.3
2634. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v.xvi-p7.1
2635. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v.xvii-p2.11
2636. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v.xvii-p8.5
2637. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=4#v.v-p58.1
2638. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=4#v.xvi-p5.1
2639. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=4#v.xvi-p6.2
2640. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=4#v.xvii-p8.6
2641. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=5#ii.i-p49.2
2642. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=5#v.vi-p7.6
2643. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=5#v.xvi-p4.1
2644. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=5#v.xvi-p7.4
2645. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=5#v.v-p81.3
2646. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=6#ii.i-p49.1
2647. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=6#v.vi-p7.7
2648. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=6#v.xvi-p9.1
2649. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=6#v.xvii-p2.12
2650. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=7#ii.v-p41.4
2651. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v.xiv-p5.9
2652. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=11#v.xvi-p3.2
2653. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=12#v.xix-p14.1
2654. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=13#v.ii-p17.12
2655. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=13#v.ii-p8.31
2656. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=13#v.xxi-p3.14
2657. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=14#v.ii-p17.13
2658. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=14#v.ii-p8.32
2659. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=14#v.xiv-p16.17
2660. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=14#v.xvii-p10.2
2661. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=14#v.xxi-p3.15
2662. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=14#v.xxi-p4.4
2663. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=14#v.xxi-p17.8
2664. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=17#v.ii-p17.2
2665. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=17#v.iv-p4.2
2666. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=18#v.ii-p17.3
2667. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=21#ii.v-p35.3
2668. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=21#v.xxii-p6.5
2669. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=21#v.xxvi-p1.3
2670. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=22#v.xvi-p5.11
2671. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=22#v.xix-p2.4
2672. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=22#v.xix-p12.10
2673. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=22#v.xix-p13.5
2674. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=22#v.xix-p20.3
2675. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=22#v.xxiii-p6.9
2676. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=23#ii.i-p66.1
2677. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=23#v.iii-p18.12
2678. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=23#v.xix-p13.1
2679. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=1#v.xvii-p8.2
2680. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=2#v.x-p23.10
2681. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=2#v.xi-p14.11
2682. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=2#v.xii-p11.4
2683. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=3#v.viii-p20.2
2684. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=6#v.xxii-p3.11
2685. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=8#v.xx-p6.8
2686. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v.xx-p6.9
2687. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.xviii-p12.6
2688. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.xxiii-p8.1
2689. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=11#v.xvii-p6.3
2690. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=11#v.xxiii-p7.6
2691. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=11#v.xiv-p18.11
2692. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=11#v.xvii-p9.4
2693. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=12#ii.i-p61.12
2694. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=12#ii.v-p52.1
2695. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=12#v.ii-p13.19
2696. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=12#v.xiv-p15.5
2697. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=12#v.xvii-p6.4
2698. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=12#v.xix-p7.2
2699. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=13#ii.i-p61.13
2700. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v.xxi-p10.2
2701. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v.xiii-p9.7
2702. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=15#v.xiii-p9.8
2703. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=16#v.ii-p13.20
2704. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=16#v.xiv-p7.4
2705. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=17#v.xiv-p7.5
2706. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=17#v.xiv-p18.12
2707. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=17#v.xvii-p3.2
2708. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=18#v.xxiii-p7.7
2709. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=19#v.xxiii-p8.2
2710. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=20#v.iii-p18.6
2711. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=20#v.iv-p8.6
2712. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=20#v.ii-p4.7
2713. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=20#v.xix-p10.8
2714. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=20#v.xxii-p4.8
2715. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=20#v.xxii-p11.1
2716. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=20#v.xix-p7.4
2717. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=20#v.xxii-p4.3
2718. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=21#v.iii-p18.7
2719. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=21#v.xxii-p11.2
2720. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=0#v.xviii-p5.4
2721. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iv.ii.ii-p2.2
2722. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iv.ii.ii-p2.6
2723. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=4#ii.iv.i-p2.1
2724. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.xvii-p15.2
2725. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v.xvii-p15.3
2726. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=8#v.iii-p9.2
2727. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=8#v.xiv-p10.4
2728. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=9#v.xvii-p15.4
2729. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=10#ii.ii-p12.6
2730. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=12#v.ii-p8.18
2731. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=14#ii.i-p34.12
2732. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v.vii-p6.11
2733. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v.x-p14.2
2734. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v.xi-p7.2
2735. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=17#v.vi-p11.2
2736. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=17#v.xv-p19.3
2737. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=17#v.xix-p9.10
2738. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=17#v.xxii-p3.4
2739. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=17#v.xxiii-p7.15
2740. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=18#ii.ii-p12.7
2741. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=20#v.v-p117.2
2742. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=0#v.xii-p11.5
2743. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=0#v.xvii-p3.3
2744. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=0#v.xvii-p6.5
2745. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=0#v.xxii-p11.3
2746. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=3#ii.vi-p104.3
2747. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=3#v.xxii-p11.4
2748. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=3#v.xxiii-p7.3
2749. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=3#v.xxiii-p6.1
2750. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v.iv-p8.8
2751. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v.iii-p18.10
2752. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=5#v.xxii-p7.3
2753. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=6#v.iv-p8.9
2754. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=6#v.xxii-p7.4
2755. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=7#v.xix-p21.1
2756. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=7#v.xxii-p5.17
2757. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=8#v.vi-p14.3
2758. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=11#ii.iv.ix-p5.2
2759. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=11#v.ii-p17.15
2760. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=11#v.xvii-p3.4
2761. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=11#v.xix-p20.9
2762. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=11#v.xix-p21.2
2763. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=11#v.xxii-p14.4
2764. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=11#v.xxii-p7.5
2765. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=12#v.xvii-p3.5
2766. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=12#v.xix-p20.10
2767. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=13#ii.iv.ix-p7.1
2768. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=13#v.xvi-p8.9
2769. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=14#iii.vii.v-p31.1
2770. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=15#v.xvi-p8.10
2771. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=15#v.xxiii-p6.4
2772. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=17#v.xii-p8.4
2773. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=17#v.xvii-p6.6
2774. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=17#v.xii-p11.6
2775. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=18#v.v-p105.6
2776. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=18#v.xii-p8.5
2777. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=18#v.xvii-p6.7
2778. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=19#v.v-p105.7
2779. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=22#v.xviii-p6.17
2780. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=24#v.viii-p9.3
2781. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=24#v.viii-p17.5
2782. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=24#v.xii-p5.3
2783. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=24#v.xx-p3.1
2784. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=27#v.ii-p12.9
2785. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=27#v.xviii-p6.6
2786. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=30#v.vii-p7.13
2787. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=0#v.xvi-p5.12
2788. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=0#v.xvii-p6.8
2789. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=0#v.xix-p9.11
2790. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=0#v.xix-p20.4
2791. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=0#v.xxiii-p7.8
2792. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=5#v.xxiv-p3.7
2793. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=8#v.xii-p8.7
2794. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=8#v.xii-p12.1
2795. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=14#v.xvii-p6.9
2796. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=23#v.xvi-p5.13
2797. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=23#v.xix-p13.9
2798. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=23#v.xxii-p2.8
2799. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=23#v.xxiii-p7.9
2800. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=24#v.xxii-p3.5
2801. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=25#v.xix-p20.5
2802. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=25#v.xxii-p3.6
2803. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=25#v.xxiii-p7.16
2804. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=25#v.xxii-p2.1
2805. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=30#v.xv-p11.9
2806. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=30#v.xix-p9.12
2807. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=31#ii.iii-p11.1
2808. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=32#ii.iii-p11.2
2809. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=0#v.x-p14.3
2810. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=5#v.xxiv-p18.8
2811. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=6#v.xxiv-p18.9
2812. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=11#v.xix-p15.1
2813. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=11#v.x-p14.4
2814. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=12#v.ii-p16.19
2815. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=12#v.xix-p15.2
2816. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=14#v.xx-p2.2
2817. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=6#v.xii-p14.1
2818. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=6#v.xvii-p10.1
2819. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=11#v.xx-p2.3
2820. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=12#ii.iv.v-p5.3
2821. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=13#ii.iv.v-p5.4
2822. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=21#iv.viii-p7.1
2823. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=23#iv.viii-p7.2
2824. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=23#iv.ix-p4.7
2825. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=29#v.xvi-p7.19
2826. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=2#v.xxiii-p6.5
2827. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#v.vi-p17.1
2828. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#v.vi-p15.3
2829. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#v.xv-p15.9
2830. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=7#ii.ii-p21.3
2831. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iii.ii.iii-p59.1
2832. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=12#v.xviii-p14.5
2833. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v.xviii-p14.6
2834. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=8#ii.i-p45.2
2835. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=8#ii.i-p67.1
2836. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=10#ii.i-p45.3
2837. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=15#v.ii-p7.14
2838. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v.ii-p7.15
2839. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=19#v.xxiv-p3.5
2840. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=20#v.xxii-p3.12
2841. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=21#ii.iii-p15.1
2842. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=21#iv.viii-p5.4
2843. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=21#v.v-p117.7
2844. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=21#v.vi-p8.5
2845. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=21#v.vi-p12.1
2846. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=21#v.xxii-p5.8
2847. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=6#v.ii-p16.23
2848. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v.iii-p16.8
2849. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=12#v.xxi-p3.1
2850. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=13#v.xiv-p18.15
2851. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=13#v.xix-p11.6
2852. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=13#v.xxi-p3.2
2853. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=13#v.xxi-p4.1
2854. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=15#ii.i-p42.2
2855. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=15#v.v-p4.6
2856. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=16#v.v-p14.1
2857. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=18#v.xix-p13.6
2858. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=18#v.xxii-p6.6
2859. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=19#ii.i-p42.1
2860. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=19#ii.ii-p17.2
2861. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=19#v.xix-p20.1
2862. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=24#v.iii-p18.15
2863. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=25#v.iii-p18.16
2864. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=2#v.iii-p18.2
2865. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=3#ii.i-p46.1
2866. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=3#v.iv-p8.1
2867. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=8#v.iii-p26.2
2868. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=9#ii.i-p46.2
2869. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.xxii-p6.7
2870. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=11#v.xiii-p8.7
2871. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=11#v.xiii-p10.1
2872. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=12#v.xiii-p10.2
2873. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v.xiii-p8.5
2874. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v.xiii-p9.2
2875. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v.xiii-p10.3
2876. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v.xiv-p7.8
2877. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v.xiv-p13.1
2878. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v.xiv-p19.14
2879. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v.xv-p7.5
2880. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v.xx-p7.7
2881. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v.xxi-p10.1
2882. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=16#v.ii-p7.16
2883. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=16#v.xx-p7.2
2884. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=17#v.xiii-p9.4
2885. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=17#v.xiii-p10.4
2886. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=17#v.xiv-p18.5
2887. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=17#v.xiv-p19.15
2888. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=17#v.xxi-p10.3
2889. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=18#v.xxiv-p18.4
2890. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=18#v.iv-p15.1
2891. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=19#v.ii-p7.17
2892. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=20#v.xx-p7.3
2893. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=21#v.xx-p7.4
2894. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=4#v.xxi-p17.9
2895. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.xxiv-p2.7
2896. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.xxiv-p3.6
2897. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=9#v.xviii-p6.18
2898. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=10#v.viii-p9.2
2899. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=10#v.viii-p17.4
2900. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=10#v.xii-p5.4
2901. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=10#v.xxvi-p5.6
2902. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=16#v.ii-p12.8
2903. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=3#ii.iv.ix-p1.7
2904. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v.iii-p20.9
2905. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=9#v.xxiv-p2.6
2906. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=4#v.v-p64.2
2907. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=12#v.xvii-p3.1
2908. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v.ii-p4.13
2909. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=3#v.v-p88.3
2910. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=9#v.xvi-p10.4
2911. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=23#v.v-p37.6
2912. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=24#v.v-p108.5
2913. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=6#v.v-p108.10
2914. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iii.ii.iii-p38.2
2915. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iii.ii.iii-p38.3
2916. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=1&scrV=9#v.xvi-p12.5
2917. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=0#v.xi-p16.8
2918. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=2#v.xxiii-p10.5
2919. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=3#v.xxii-p12.1
2920. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=3#v.xxiii-p12.1
2921. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=9#ii.vi-p76.2
2922. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v.x-p23.7
2923. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v.xi-p14.8
2924. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.xvi-p11.4
2925. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=11#ii.vi-p40.3
2926. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=11#v.xvi-p11.5
2927. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=12#v.xvi-p14.9
2928. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v.iv-p5.9
2929. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v.xvii-p2.13
2930. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v.iv-p4.6
2931. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v.iv-p5.10
2932. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v.xvii-p2.14
2933. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v.xvii-p5.3
2934. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iv.vii-p4.5
2935. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iv.vii-p4.6
2936. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=2#v.xvii-p14.4
2937. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v.iv-p15.6
2938. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=9&scrV=0#v.xi-p16.8
2939. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=9#v.xiii-p4.11
2940. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=9#v.xiii-p7.9
2941. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=10#v.xiii-p4.12
2942. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=10#v.xiii-p7.10
2943. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=11#v.v-p44.2
2944. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=11#v.v-p124.1
2945. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=13#v.ix-p5.1
2946. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=15#v.iv-p6.6
2947. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=15#v.ii-p1.1
2948. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=17#v.v-p14.6
2949. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=17#v.v-p45.1
2950. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=19#v.xiii-p5.6
2951. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=1#v.xxvi-p8.2
2952. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii.ii.iii-p69.1
2953. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=2#v.xxvi-p2.2
2954. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=2#v.xxvi-p5.1
2955. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=2#v.xxvi-p6.17
2956. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=2#v.xxvi-p9.2
2957. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=4#v.v-p90.1
2958. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=5#v.xxv-p13.1
2959. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=6#ii.v-p33.3
2960. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=6#v.xv-p15.14
2961. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=0#v.xxii-p14.5
2962. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iv.xxix-p7.3
2963. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=15#ii.iv.viii-p1.3
2964. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=15#v.ii-p16.1
2965. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=15#v.iv-p10.1
2966. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=15#v.xix-p13.4
2967. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=15#v.xxii-p4.1
2968. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#ii.i-p44.5
2969. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#ii.ii-p21.2
2970. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v.iii-p20.7
2971. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v.vi-p10.3
2972. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=6#ii.iii-p24.1
2973. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=13#v.iv-p6.9
2974. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=21#v.xix-p3.1
2975. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=29#ii.v-p2.1
2976. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=0#v.v-p45.2
2977. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=0#v.v-p124.2
2978. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=3#v.ii-p6.10
2979. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=4#v.ii-p6.11
2980. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=10#ii.vi-p45.1
2981. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=15#v.v-p120.1
2982. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=15#v.v-p124.3
2983. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=16#ii.ii-p6.1
2984. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=16#v.v-p11.2
2985. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=16#v.v-p3.4
2986. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=16#v.v-p45.3
2987. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=9#v.v-p27.4
2988. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=9#v.xvi-p8.1
2989. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=9#v.xvii-p2.1
2990. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=9#v.xvii-p4.3
2991. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=9#v.xvii-p5.1
2992. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=9#v.xvii-p15.7
2993. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=9#v.xix-p10.1
2994. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=10#v.xiv-p4.3
2995. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=10#v.xvi-p8.2
2996. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=10#v.xvii-p4.4
2997. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v.v-p86.1
2998. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v.v-p108.2
2999. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v.v-p116.4
3000. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=15#ii.iii-p24.3
3001. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=17#v.xxiii-p9.11
3002. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=19#v.v-p81.12
3003. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=19#v.xix-p16.7
3004. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=26#v.xii-p10.5
3005. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=12#v.ii-p16.8
3006. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=15#ii.i-p67.2
3007. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=15#v.iii-p21.8
3008. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=15#v.iv-p11.5
3009. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v.iii-p24.1
3010. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v.iv-p4.16
3011. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v.iii-p1.5
3012. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v.ii-p6.7
3013. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=17#v.iii-p1.6
3014. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=3#ii.vi-p47.2
3015. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iii.ii.iii-p37.6
3016. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=8#iii.ii.iii-p37.7
3017. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v.xxii-p15.1
3018. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=1#ii.i-p11.1
3019. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.iii-p20.1
3020. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=2#ii.iv.viii-p2.1
3021. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v.ii-p2.3
3022. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=7#iv.xxix-p7.2
3023. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=9#ii.v-p2.2
3024. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iv.xxix-p7.1
3025. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=16#v.xix-p16.6
3026. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=11#v.ix-p4.1
3027. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=11#v.xiii-p3.7
3028. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=12#v.iii-p20.10
3029. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=12#v.xiii-p3.8
3030. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=12#v.xvii-p6.2
3031. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v.iii-p20.11
3032. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=1#ii.iii-p24.2
3033. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=3#v.xii-p8.6
3034. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=3#v.xii-p11.7
3035. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=4#v.xvii-p4.1
3036. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.xvii-p4.2
3037. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=7#iii.ii.iii-p37.1
3038. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=8#v.xiii-p5.1
3039. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=8#v.xiv-p19.19
3040. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=8#v.xv-p19.8
3041. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=8#v.xvii-p9.5
3042. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iii.ii.iii-p57.1
3043. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.xx-p9.10
3044. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=2#ii.i-p43.4
3045. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v.iii-p12.3
3046. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v.vi-p13.2
3047. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v.xvi-p3.7
3048. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=3#ii.i-p42.3
3049. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=3#ii.ii-p21.5
3050. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v.iii-p13.2
3051. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v.v-p4.7
3052. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v.vi-p13.4
3053. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=6#v.xv-p17.13
3054. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v.xix-p13.3
3055. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=9#v.vi-p10.4
3056. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=10#v.vi-p14.6
3057. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=11#v.vi-p11.8
3058. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=12#v.vi-p11.9
3059. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=14#v.x-p23.4
3060. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=14#v.xi-p14.5
3061. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=14#v.xv-p17.14
3062. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=0#v.v-p20.3
3063. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=0#v.xvi-p3.8
3064. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=2#ii.iii-p20.3
3065. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=2#v.ix-p2.2
3066. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=2#v.xvi-p3.9
3067. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=2#v.iv-p6.2
3068. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=3#v.iii-p17.5
3069. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=3#ii.iii-p20.4
3070. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=3#v.ii-p9.3
3071. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=3#v.ix-p2.3
3072. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=3#v.xvi-p3.10
3073. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=4#ii.vi-p65.2
3074. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=4#v.iv-p13.5
3075. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=4#v.xvii-p3.16
3076. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=5#ii.iii-p17.1
3077. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=5#v.xv-p10.14
3078. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.v-p20.4
3079. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.xv-p15.1
3080. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.xv-p16.6
3081. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=14#ii.i-p53.1
3082. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iv.viii-p5.1
3083. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=15#v.xxi-p1.1
3084. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.xiv-p8.3
3085. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v.xiv-p8.4
3086. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v.xv-p10.9
3087. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v.xxii-p4.2
3088. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=7#v.xvii-p3.8
3089. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=7#v.xvii-p9.2
3090. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=7#v.xviii-p14.1
3091. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=8#v.ii-p13.27
3092. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=8#v.xviii-p14.2
3093. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=11#ii.v-p30.3
3094. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=11#v.xvi-p14.7
3095. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=12#v.v-p42.2
3096. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=17#v.xvi-p14.8
3097. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=18#ii.v-p30.4
3098. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=19#v.ii-p13.28
3099. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=0#v.ii-p13.36
3100. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=12#v.v-p44.1
3101. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=13#v.v-p49.2
3102. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=13#v.v-p55.1
3103. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=13#v.v-p61.1
3104. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=14#v.ii-p13.37
3105. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=15#v.xxii-p3.8
3106. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=16#v.xx-p5.5
3107. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=16#v.xxv-p13.4
3108. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=0#v.ii-p13.29
3109. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=0#v.xv-p12.2
3110. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=0#v.xv-p16.7
3111. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=1#ii.v-p24.1
3112. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=1#v.xv-p4.1
3113. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=1#v.xv-p14.1
3114. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=3#v.xv-p12.3
3115. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=5#v.xv-p11.2
3116. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=6#v.xv-p11.3
3117. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=7#ii.v-p34.2
3118. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=8#v.ii-p13.30
3119. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=8#v.xv-p16.8
3120. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=9#ii.i-p61.11
3121. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=9#v.ii-p13.31
3122. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=9#v.xv-p16.9
3123. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=9#v.xvi-p5.14
3124. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=9#v.xix-p12.8
3125. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=20#ii.i-p52.4
3126. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=2#ii.iv-p17.1
3127. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=10#iii.ii.iii-p37.4
3128. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=10#v.v-p86.3
3129. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=10#v.v-p108.6
3130. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=11#v.ii-p8.15
3131. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=13#v.xiv-p16.24
3132. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=14#v.xiv-p16.25
3133. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=17#v.v-p108.7
3134. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=17#v.xiv-p16.26
3135. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=18#v.ii-p1.3
3136. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=18#v.v-p86.4
3137. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=18#v.v-p108.8
3138. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=18#v.xxi-p4.6
3139. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=19#iv.ix-p5.5
3140. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=0#ii.v-p30.8
3141. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=0#v.xiv-p16.27
3142. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=2#v.xv-p4.2
3143. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=16#v.xiv-p7.7
3144. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=16#v.xv-p11.11
3145. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=16#v.xiv-p13.8
3146. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=18#v.xiv-p13.6
3147. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=19#v.iii-p16.6
3148. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=20#v.xiv-p16.28
3149. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=21#v.xiv-p16.29
3150. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=22#ii.i-p43.5
3151. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=24#ii.v-p33.6
3152. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=26#ii.v-p25.1
3153. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=26#v.xv-p13.1
3154. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=28#v.xv-p12.1
3155. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=8&scrV=0#ii.i-p43.6
3156. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=8&scrV=1#v.xiii-p10.5
3157. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=8&scrV=5#v.ii-p13.21
3158. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=8&scrV=5#v.xiii-p8.2
3159. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=8&scrV=6#ii.i-p43.7
3160. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=8&scrV=6#v.ii-p13.22
3161. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=8&scrV=6#v.xiv-p7.12
3162. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=8&scrV=8#v.xiv-p13.3
3163. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=8&scrV=9#v.xiv-p13.4
3164. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=8&scrV=10#v.ii-p17.10
3165. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=8&scrV=11#ii.i-p36.2
3166. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=8&scrV=12#ii.v-p41.1
3167. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=8&scrV=13#ii.v-p39.1
3168. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=8&scrV=13#v.iii-p11.3
3169. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=0#v.ii-p13.23
3170. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=2#iv.ix-p5.1
3171. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=3#iv.ix-p5.2
3172. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=5#v.xiv-p7.1
3173. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=7#v.ii-p13.24
3174. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=8#iv.ix-p7.1
3175. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=8#v.xiii-p9.3
3176. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=8#iv.ix-p5.4
3177. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=9#ii.v-p30.7
3178. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=9#v.xxi-p9.5
3179. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=10#ii.v-p30.6
3180. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=10#v.iv-p3.8
3181. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=10#v.xx-p7.6
3182. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=10#v.xxi-p9.6
3183. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=11#ii.v-p33.4
3184. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=11#v.ii-p13.25
3185. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=12#ii.v-p41.3
3186. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=12#v.ii-p13.26
3187. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=12#v.xv-p15.4
3188. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=14#ii.i-p55.1
3189. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=14#v.xiv-p8.13
3190. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=14#v.xiv-p11.6
3191. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=14#v.xv-p11.8
3192. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=15#v.xiv-p7.2
3193. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=15#v.xiv-p8.2
3194. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=15#v.xiv-p11.7
3195. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=15#v.xiv-p15.8
3196. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=15#v.xix-p6.3
3197. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=16#v.xiv-p8.9
3198. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=18#v.xiv-p8.12
3199. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=22#ii.i-p55.2
3200. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=24#iv.ix-p5.3
3201. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=0#v.ii-p8.16
3202. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=0#v.xiii-p8.3
3203. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=0#v.xv-p10.10
3204. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=0#v.xxi-p9.7
3205. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=1#v.xiii-p8.4
3206. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=1#v.xiii-p9.1
3207. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=1#v.xiii-p9.5
3208. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=1#v.xiv-p7.9
3209. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=1#v.xx-p7.8
3210. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=1#v.xxi-p9.8
3211. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=3#v.xxi-p9.2
3212. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=4#v.xxi-p9.3
3213. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=5#v.xv-p10.16
3214. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=5#v.xv-p11.7
3215. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=6#v.xv-p11.5
3216. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=9#v.xiv-p19.16
3217. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=10#v.xiv-p19.17
3218. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=10#v.xviii-p13.4
3219. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=14#v.xviii-p13.5
3220. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=19#iv.ix-p5.6
3221. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=20#ii.i-p52.2
3222. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=20#ii.i-p36.3
3223. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=20#iv.ix-p5.7
3224. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=21#ii.v-p34.5
3225. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=21#v.ii-p13.34
3226. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=21#v.xv-p10.11
3227. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=22#ii.v-p54.1
3228. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=22#v.ii-p8.17
3229. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=22#v.ii-p13.35
3230. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=27#iii.ii.iii-p38.5
3231. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=29#ii.v-p39.2
3232. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=29#v.vii-p7.16
3233. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=29#v.xv-p15.16
3234. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=0#v.xiv-p16.3
3235. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=0#v.xix-p8.1
3236. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=3#ii.ii-p5.5
3237. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=6#ii.ii-p5.4
3238. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=7#v.xiii-p5.9
3239. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=8#v.xiv-p16.5
3240. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=13#v.xiv-p17.6
3241. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=24#v.xix-p7.5
3242. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=32#v.ii-p8.8
3243. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=33#v.ii-p8.9
3244. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=40#iv.ix-p5.8
3245. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=40#v.xix-p8.5
3246. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=0#v.xiv-p18.1
3247. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=0#v.xix-p8.2
3248. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=1#v.ix-p5.7
3249. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=1#v.xix-p15.3
3250. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=2#ii.v-p27.5
3251. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=9#v.v-p14.7
3252. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=15#iii.ii.iii-p42.3
3253. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=18#v.xiv-p8.19
3254. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=18#v.xiv-p7.6
3255. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=18#v.xxi-p8.6
3256. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=22#iv.xviii-p6.1
3257. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=22#v.xix-p3.4
3258. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=22#v.xix-p8.3
3259. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=22#v.xxiii-p6.18
3260. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=23#v.xxiii-p6.19
3261. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=24#v.xv-p14.6
3262. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=29#ii.i-p45.6
3263. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=8#ii.i-p43.3
3264. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=8#ii.ii-p18.6
3265. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=8#v.iii-p18.14
3266. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=8#ii.iv-p11.1
3267. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=8#v.iv-p8.12
3268. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=9#v.iii-p18.17
3269. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=15#ii.v-p48.1
3270. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=17#ii.vi-p24.1
3271. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.ii-p3.2
3272. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=13#v.viii-p10.2
3273. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=17#ii.i-p15.1
3274. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=17#v.v-p22.1
3275. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=17#v.v-p33.3
3276. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=17#v.v-p39.2
3277. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=17#v.v-p60.1
3278. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=17#v.v-p116.1
3279. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=17#v.v-p122.5
3280. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=17#v.xii-p14.3
3281. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=17#v.xvii-p15.5
3282. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=18#v.xvii-p15.6
3283. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=21#ii.iv-p15.1
3284. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=0#v.xx-p4.3
3285. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=8#v.xiii-p7.14
3286. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=8#v.xiii-p5.2
3287. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.xx-p9.9
3288. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=13#ii.v-p20.1
3289. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v.xviii-p9.11
3290. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=19#v.ii-p8.12
3291. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=9#v.xii-p13.4
3292. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=6#v.ii-p10.4
3293. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=7#v.xviii-p6.7
3294. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=12#v.ii-p13.14
3295. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.ii-p3.3
3296. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.xix-p21.3
3297. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v.xxv-p1.1
3298. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=5#v.xii-p14.2
3299. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=5#v.xv-p15.12
3300. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=10#v.xiv-p19.6
3301. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=11#ii.v-p14.3
3302. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=12#ii.ii-p18.2
3303. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=12#v.xix-p10.2
3304. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=20#v.iii-p12.4
3305. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=21#v.ii-p10.2
3306. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=22#v.xvii-p11.6
3307. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=23#ii.iv.viii-p1.1
3308. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=23#v.xvii-p13.1
3309. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=23#v.xix-p10.3
3310. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=23#v.iii-p16.9
3311. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=25#v.xvii-p13.2
3312. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=25#v.xix-p10.4
3313. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=2#v.v-p37.5
3314. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=4#v.xxii-p4.6
3315. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=5#ii.v-p48.2
3316. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=5#v.xv-p4.3
3317. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=5#v.xv-p11.10
3318. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v.xv-p4.4
3319. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v.xv-p10.13
3320. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v.xvii-p2.3
3321. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v.xvii-p8.1
3322. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v.xix-p9.4
3323. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.xvii-p2.4
3324. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v.xxvi-p2.3
3325. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v.xxvi-p9.3
3326. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v.xxvi-p14.2
3327. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v.xxvi-p6.10
3328. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=16#v.xxi-p4.8
3329. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=19#v.ii-p13.16
3330. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=1#v.xiii-p5.7
3331. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=18#ii.v-p49.1
3332. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=19#ii.ii-p18.1
3333. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=19#iv.ix-p7.2
3334. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=19#v.vi-p13.7
3335. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=19#v.xvii-p2.7
3336. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=22#ii.v-p35.4
3337. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=3#v.xxiv-p9.9
3338. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=11#v.iv-p2.4
3339. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=17#v.xv-p20.3
3340. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=0#v.xix-p9.5
3341. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=0#v.xxvi-p14.3
3342. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=1#v.xix-p21.5
3343. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=1#v.xxii-p7.15
3344. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=1#v.xxvi-p14.4
3345. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=4#v.xix-p20.11
3346. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=4#v.xxii-p7.13
3347. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=10#v.xix-p9.6
3348. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#ii.i-p44.6
3349. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.xiv-p17.2
3350. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=2#ii.i-p44.7
3351. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v.xiv-p17.3
3352. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#ii.iii-p7.3
3353. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v.iii-p15.4
3354. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=7#v.xx-p10.12
3355. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=1#v.xv-p14.4
3356. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=1#v.xxv-p13.3
3357. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iv.xi-p2.1
3358. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=2#v.xv-p14.5
3359. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=15#v.xviii-p6.13
3360. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=16#ii.vi-p42.1
3361. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=16#v.xviii-p6.14
3362. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=23#ii.i-p62.1
3363. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=23#ii.vi-p13.1
3364. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=24#ii.iii-p7.5
3365. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=24#v.xxiii-p7.14
3366. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=27#ii.iv.ix-p1.5
3367. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=1#v.xiii-p7.15
3368. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#ii.i-p24.2
3369. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#ii.iii-p8.3
3370. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#v.v-p4.2
3371. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#v.xiii-p7.16
3372. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=4#v.viii-p14.1
3373. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=4#v.viii-p19.1
3374. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=4#v.ix-p1.1
3375. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=4#v.x-p3.1
3376. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=7#v.xx-p2.4
3377. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=8#iv.viii-p5.2
3378. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=19#iii.vii.i-p2.1
3379. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=23#v.iii-p21.2
3380. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=24#v.xxiii-p7.11
3381. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=0#v.xiv-p17.4
3382. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=0#v.xxiii-p7.12
3383. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iii.vii.v-p30.1
3384. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=1#v.ii-p20.1
3385. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=2#v.ii-p20.2
3386. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v.x-p9.8
3387. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=7#v.v-p102.4
3388. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=13#v.xxiii-p7.13
3389. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=14#v.xiv-p17.5
3390. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=3#v.xiii-p7.12
3391. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=4#v.xiii-p7.13
3392. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=7#v.iv-p13.3
3393. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=7#v.vii-p8.2
3394. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=8#ii.iv.ix-p1.8
3395. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=9#v.ii-p2.1
3396. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=9#v.iv-p13.8
3397. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=9#v.iii-p21.4
3398. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=10#ii.iv.ix-p1.6
3399. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=13#v.iv-p3.1
3400. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=13#v.iii-p20.6
3401. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=16#v.ix-p10.1
3402. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=19#v.x-p5.1
3403. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=21#v.xxiii-p14.2
3404. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=21#v.xxiv-p2.4
3405. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=3John&scrCh=1&scrV=9#ii.vi-p43.4
3406. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=3John&scrCh=1&scrV=10#ii.vi-p43.4
3407. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=4#v.xvi-p10.3
3408. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=4#v.vi-p2.1
3409. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v.v-p6.5
3410. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v.v-p18.4
3411. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v.v-p3.2
3412. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v.v-p117.1
3413. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=11#v.vi-p11.5
3414. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=0#v.vi-p11.6
3415. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=0#v.xxii-p5.7
3416. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=3#iii.ii.iii-p56.1
3417. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=4#v.xxiii-p9.3
3418. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=5#v.xix-p18.2
3419. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=5#v.xxiii-p9.9
3420. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=7#v.viii-p17.9
3421. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=8#v.vi-p11.7
3422. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=10#iii.ii.iii-p37.5
3423. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.ii-p16.20
3424. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v.ii-p16.21
3425. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v.xxiv-p9.11
3426. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v.xxiii-p10.8
3427. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=17#ii.iii-p15.4
3428. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=17#v.ii-p19.6
3429. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=20#v.xxiii-p10.6
3430. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=20#v.xxiii-p10.9
3431. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=21#v.xxiii-p10.7
3432. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=23#v.v-p108.11
3433. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=23#v.xxiii-p6.11
3434. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=93#v.vi-p11.10
3435. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=0#iii.ii.iii-p56.2
3436. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iii.ii.iii-p56.3
3437. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=12#ii.iii-p15.5
3438. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=15#iv.xiv-p4.1
3439. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=20#v.xvii-p3.6
3440. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=20#v.xvii-p9.3
3441. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=21#v.xix-p15.4
3442. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=4&scrV=0#v.v-p6.6
3443. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=4&scrV=8#v.v-p6.7
3444. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=4&scrV=8#v.xi-p1.3
3445. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=4&scrV=8#v.xvii-p10.6
3446. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=4&scrV=11#ii.v-p55.2
3447. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=4&scrV=11#v.v-p86.2
3448. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=4&scrV=11#v.v-p101.1
3449. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=4&scrV=11#v.xi-p6.6
3450. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=0#v.xvii-p10.7
3451. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=8#v.xvii-p10.8
3452. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=9#ii.iii-p15.6
3453. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=11#v.xix-p3.3
3454. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=13#v.vi-p12.3
3455. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=6&scrV=9#v.ii-p12.5
3456. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=6&scrV=9#v.ii-p16.22
3457. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=7&scrV=14#v.xxiii-p21.1
3458. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=12&scrV=0#v.ii-p12.6
3459. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=12&scrV=11#v.ii-p12.7
3460. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=13&scrV=8#ii.ii-p18.7
3461. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=13&scrV=15#v.xxiii-p14.4
3462. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=0#v.xix-p15.5
3463. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=13#iv.xviii-p6.3
3464. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=13#v.xix-p15.6
3465. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=13#v.xxv-p1.2
3466. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=15&scrV=18#v.xix-p10.7
3467. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=16&scrV=9#v.xviii-p12.7
3468. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=17&scrV=4#v.xxiii-p14.3
3469. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=17&scrV=6#v.xxiii-p14.5
3470. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=17&scrV=14#v.vi-p10.7
3471. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=17&scrV=14#v.xv-p17.9
3472. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=18&scrV=4#v.xxiii-p14.1
3473. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=19&scrV=0#v.vi-p10.8
3474. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=19&scrV=7#ii.iii-p9.1
3475. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=19&scrV=10#v.xxiv-p18.13
3476. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=19&scrV=16#v.vi-p10.9
3477. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=19&scrV=16#v.xxii-p6.8
3478. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=19&scrV=20#ii.iv.iv-p1.6
3479. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=19&scrV=20#v.xxii-p10.3
3480. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=20&scrV=15#v.xi-p14.2
3481. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=14#v.iii-p18.8
3482. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=14#v.iv-p8.7
3483. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=14#v.ii-p4.8
3484. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=14#v.iv-p10.3
3485. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=14#v.xxii-p4.7
3486. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=23#ii.iii-p8.4
3487. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=23#ii.iii-p13.1
3488. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=24#ii.iii-p8.5
3489. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=12#iv.ix-p4.11
3490. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=17#v.xxii-p2.10
3491. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=20#iv.ix-p4.12
3492. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=5&scrV=7#v.x-p10.4
3493. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=8&scrV=1#v.x-p18.1
3494. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=8&scrV=1#v.xi-p11.1
3495. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=11&scrV=24#v.v-p100.4
3496. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=3&scrV=20#v.xvi-p16.1
3497. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=20&scrV=21#v.x-p17.1
3498. file:///ccel/a/arminius/works1/cache/works1.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=31&scrV=8#v.x-p17.2
