  
   COMMENTARIES

   ON THE

   EPISTLES OF PAUL THE APOSTLE

   TO

   THE CORINTHIANS


   BY JOHN CALVIN



   TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL LATIN, AND COLLATED WITH
   THE AUTHOR'S FRENCH VERSION

   BY THE REV. JOHN PRINGLE



   VOLUME FIRST



   CHRISTIAN CLASSICS ETHEREAL LIBRARY
   GRAND RAPIDS, MI

   [1]http://www.ccel.org
     __________________________________________________________________

   TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE

   The Sixteenth century was distinguished by a large and valuable
   accession of Expositors of the Sacred Volume. Mosheim reckons up not
   fewer than fifty-five writers, who, in the course of that century,
   devoted their labors, to a greater or less extent, to the
   interpretation or illustration of the inspired writings -- a
   circumstance which at once indicated the progress of the principles of
   the Reformation, and contributed most materially to their diffusion.
   Nor were expository treatises, in illustrations of the Sacred
   Scriptures, simply increased in number; they were marked by a decided
   improvement in point of intrinsic value. It is to the honor of a large
   proportion of the Interpreters of that age, that, rejecting the
   practice so well exposed by Bishop Horsley, of "drawing I know not what
   mystical meanings, by a certain cabalistic alchemy, from the simplest
   expressions of holy writ," they made it their endeavor, in every case,
   to ascertain the true meaning of the Spirit of God, by a careful
   examination of the text and context.

   In unbending integrity of purpose in the investigation of the Inspired
   Oracles -- which must be regarded as one of the primary excellences of
   an Expositor -- John Calvin is surpassed by none in his own, or indeed
   in any age. His readers, even where they may not be prepared to adopt
   his interpretation of a passage, cannot fail to perceive that it is his
   sincere desire and honest endeavor to ascertain its true meaning. His
   uprightness of design is more especially observable in connection with
   passages bearing on controverted points. In such cases the candid
   reader will discover no disposition to wrest a single expression for
   the purpose of enlisting it on the side of a particular system of
   opinion; but, on the contrary, the utmost fairness of interpretation is
   uniformly apparent.

   Every one that is acquainted with Calvin's history, and considers the
   trying scenes through which he was called to pass, must feel astonished
   that he should have found leisure to prepare, in addition to all his
   other writings, Commentaries on nearly the whole of the Sacred
   Scriptures. That he wrote so much, and more especially as an Expositor,
   appears to have been chiefly owing to the frequent and urgent
   solicitations of his intimate and beloved Farel, who "not merely
   entreated Calvin, but frequently urged him with great vehemence to
   write one Commentary after another, from a conviction that he possessed
   the gifts requisite for exposition in a very extraordinary manner, and
   that, with the blessing of God, his works of this kind would be
   extensively useful. Being an inconsiderable man myself,' said he, I am
   wont to require very much from those that possess the greatest
   excellence, and often press them hard to labor beyond their strength.'
   It was his conviction that every one who had received superior talents
   was bound to devote them to the advancement of the kingdom of God." [1]

   The Epistles of Paul to the Corinthians form a most important part of
   the Sacred Writings. Though not so systematic as the Epistle to the
   Romans, they contain many passages, bearing directly on the
   fundamentally important doctrines of the Christian system, while they
   are of the highest utility in connection with Practical Theology. The
   disorders that had unhappily crept into the Church at Corinth, gave
   occasion for the Apostle's handling at greater length than in any of
   his other Epistles various important points as to doctrine and worship;
   while the relaxed state of discipline that had begun to prevail among
   them rendered it necessary to exhibit more fully the principles which
   ought to regulate the administration of the Christian Church. In this
   the overruling hand of Him who brings good out of evil is strikingly
   apparent.

   While in the selection of the particular places into which the Gospel
   was first introduced, and in which Christian Churches were first
   planted, there is a display of Divine sovereignty which it is beyond
   our power for fathom, this at least is abundantly manifest, that the
   places selected were not those in which the triumphs of the Gospel were
   likely to be most easily affected, but quite the reverse. As the skill
   of the workman appears so much the more strikingly, when the tools
   employed by him are few and simple, and the materials to be wrought
   upon are hard and unyielding; so the wonders achieved in the first ages
   of the Church, through the foolishness of preaching. (1 Corinthians
   1:21) excite so much the more our astonishment, when we take into view
   the peculiarly formidable obstacles that opposed its progress in the
   places that were selected as the scenes of its triumphs. Of this the
   inspired narrative furnished in the Acts of the Apostles presents
   numerous and striking illustrations; and when we observe the particular
   Churches to which Paul's Epistles are addressed -- in the order in
   which they are presented to our view in the New Testament -- it might
   almost seem as if the order of arrangement had been designed for the
   very purpose of calling our particular attention to the fact that the
   triumphs of the Gospel had been most signal in those places in which
   its success might have appeared most unlikely. It is a remarkable
   circumstance, and, assuredly, it is not to be looked upon as merely
   accidental, that the Christian Church to which the first of Paul's
   Epistles -- in the order in which they stand -- is addressed, is one
   that had been planted, not in some city of secondary importance, but in
   Rome itself, the metropolis of the then known world; while the second
   of the Churches to whom Paul's Epistles are addressed is that of
   Corinth, a city that was proverbial among Heathens themselves for its
   extraordinary profligacy, and consequently the most unlikely place of
   all to be the scene of the triumphs of a religion that will allow of no
   compromise with iniquity.

   When Paul first visited Corinth, appearances were most unpromising;
   but, having received special encouragement from his Divine Master, he
   continued to labor at Corinth for a year and six months, (Acts 18:11;)
   and such was the success of his labors in that profligate city, that
   after enumerating some of the worst descriptions of character, he says
   to the Corinthian converts, -- "And such were some of you," (1
   Corinthians 6:11). While, however, the notorious wickedness that
   prevailed at Corinth was the occasion of illustrating so much the more
   clearly the power of Christianity in subduing human depravity, that
   extreme dissoluteness of manners to which the Corinthian Christians had
   been addicted previously to their conversion, and which was daily
   witnessed by them in the unconverted around them, was fitted to exert a
   most injurious influence; and while the disorders that prevailed in the
   Corinthians Church after Paul left them, were in part attributable to
   the insidious efforts of false teachers, there seems every reason to
   believe that they were, in a very considerable degree, owing to the
   contagion of corrupt manners around them. It is to this that we must
   trace their preference of the ornaments of speech to the plain
   unadorned doctrine of the cross -- their party jealousies -- their
   vexatious lawsuits -- their unseemly fellowship with heathens in their
   idol-feasts; and their philosophical speculations, leading them to
   question the possibility of a resurrection from the dead; while the
   flagrant case of incest, fallen into by one of their number, and
   connived at by the others, must still more manifestly be ascribed, in
   part, to the contagion of evil example. Yet even in this we have
   occasion still farther to mark the overruling hand of God in making
   evil subservient to good -- the disordered state of the Corinthian
   Church having given occasion for exhortations and reproofs that are
   fraught with invaluable instruction to the Church of Christ in every
   successive age.

   Calvin's Commentary on the First Epistle to the Corinthians was first
   published in the year 1546, and his Commentary on the Second Epistle
   was published in the course of the same year. It was a year that was
   greatly "unfavorable to Calvin's repose. He was obliged to cheer the
   drooping spirits of the Genevese, whom the designs of Charles V.
   against The Reformed Religion had alarmed. But, besides the cares which
   the fear of all these evils occasioned him, he was deeply afflicted at
   the state of Geneva, and the general and daring profligacy of its
   inhabitants." [2]

   In the course of the same year (as is stated by Beza) one of the
   members of the senate, "instigated, it is supposed, by two ministers of
   the Consistory, both of them given to drunkenness, and not less afraid
   than others of the rigor of the law, accused Calvin of preaching false
   doctrine." It may well appear surprising that in such circumstances he
   should have found leisure for preparing this valuable portion of his
   Expository Works. This, however, is not peculiar to this portion of his
   Commentaries; for the greater part of them were prepared amidst
   numerous engagements and harassing occurrences. Yet they do not bear
   the marks of haste, but might seem to have been prepared in quiet
   retirement.

   The reader will observe that The Dedication, which is prefixed to the
   Commentary on the First Epistle to the Corinthians in all the ordinary
   editions of Calvin's works, bears date in 1556. It is however stated,
   at the same time, by Calvin in the close of the Dedication, that the
   Commentary to which it is prefixed had been originally published by him
   ten years previously. It will farther be observed that in the
   commencement of the Dedication, Calvin alludes to an individual to whom
   he had originally dedicated the Commentary, but whose name he had been
   under the painful necessity -- contrary to his usual manner -- of
   erasing from his writings. The individual alluded to is James of
   Burgundy. The original Dedication, which is exceedingly rare, is
   contained in "Lettres de Calvin a Jaque de Bourgogne," kindly allowed
   to the Translator by Mr. Laing, Edinburgh, from the Library of Writers
   to the Signet. A translation of that Dedication, as well as of the one
   that was subsequently prefixed by Calvin to this part of his
   Commentaries, will be found below.

   The circumstances connected with the case of James of Burgundy, are
   briefly stated by Bayle in his Dictionary, (Art. Philip of Burgundy,)
   in the following terms: -- "James of Burgundy, Lord of Fallaix,
   grandson, I suppose, of Baldwin, another natural son of Duke Philip,
   professed the Protestant religion, but being scandalized at the
   disputes which arose at Geneva between Bolsec and Calvin in the year
   1551, he and his wife turned aside from the doctrine of the Reformed.
   He had carried it fair in the Church several years. Calvin dedicated to
   him his Commentary on the First Epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians,
   but afterwards he suppressed that Dedication, and prefixed another to
   The Marquis of Vic."

   Farther, Bayle, in the Art. Calvin, remarks, when speaking of Beza's
   Life of Calvin -- "We do not find in the edition of 1564, in 12mo, what
   I have transcribed from the folio edition of 1565, when I said that the
   grandson of a bastard of Philip, the good Duke of Burgundy, forsook the
   Church of Rome."

   The editor of "Lettres de Calvin," states that, after much fruitless
   search in many quarters for two documents referred to in Calvin's
   Letters, viz. the Dedication of Calvin's Commentary on the First
   Epistle to the Corinthians, and an Apology for the Masters of Falais,
   presented to the Emperor Charles the Fifth, and composed by Calvin, he
   had at length obtained them from one of the librarians of Geneva. The
   Dedication, he states, had been "transcribed from a copy that is at
   present at Strasburg." "These pieces," he adds, "arrived just in time
   for being printed in the last sheet of the Letters, to which I have not
   failed to append them, as being absolutely necessary to render them
   intelligible. I flatter myself that the public will receive them with
   delight, as an authentic document, [3] hitherto wanting in the
   ecclesiastical history of this country. Even those who have neither
   interest nor inclination for knowing this history to the bottom, will
   admire the beauty of Calvin's genius, the insinuating turns of the
   Dedication, and the liberty and modesty that reign equally in the
   Apology; and they will agree with me in thinking, that Calvin was no
   less expert, in the art of pleading, than he had been in the art of
   preaching."

   James of Burgundy was the grandson of Baldwin, a natural son of Philip,
   Duke of Burgundy, whom the Emperor Maximilian, in 1501, put in
   possession of Falais, a "Manor of Brabant, situated on the borders of
   the county of Namur, upon the river Mohaine, between the towns of Huy
   and Henneguy." He was "elevated to the court of the Emperor Charles the
   Fifth. He embraced the views of the Protestants at the age of fifteen.
   He afterwards married Jolande of Brederode, a descendant of the ancient
   Counts of Holland, and aunt to Henry of Brederode." "This marriage
   increased the suspicions that he had conceived as to the religions in
   which he was brought up, so that he adopted the resolution of leaving
   his native country, where he reckoned his life no longer safe. His
   withdrawment led to a law-suit, before the court of Malines, for the
   confiscation of his lands. During his exile, the Master of Falais
   changed his abode from time to time, having taken refuge first at
   Cologne, afterwards at Strasbourg, and at Basle, and, last of all, at
   Geneva. There is ground to believe that he was a person of merit, upon
   the testimony of Calvin himself, who, after pronouncing upon him the
   highest eulogiums in his Dedication to the First Epistle to the
   Corinthians, carried on a familiar correspondence with him for nearly
   ten years, and takes pleasure in subscribing himself very frequently
   his friend unreservedly forever. [4]

   "It is true that this friendship did not always continue, but, on the
   contrary, changed into irreconcilable aversion. It may at first view be
   thought, that the fault was altogether on the side of the Master of
   Falais, and that Calvin must have had sufficient reasons for carrying
   matters so far. We must, however, beware of forming a rash judgment. We
   often see the greatest animosities between the best friends arise out
   of nothing. Frequently the two parties are equally in the wrong; and in
   many cases the fault is found to have been on the side of the one that
   had been least suspected."... The reader who peruses superficially the
   statement of Beza, quoted by Bayle, might imagine not merely that the
   Master of Falais had approved of all that Bolsec had done or said, but
   also that he entirely abandoned the side of the Protestants, and
   entered again the communion of the Romish Church. He might, therefore,
   fall into a mistake on all these points.

   "I do not believe that the Master of Falais ever thought of approving
   of the conduct of Bolsec, who ventured in a full church to contradict a
   minister, when preaching the doctrine of predestination. Neither Calvin
   nor Beza say so. Besides, the Master of Falais protests in his Apology,
   that he has no sympathy with those that support their religion in a
   turbulent and seditious manner. Assuredly he must have been a fanatic,
   to do what Bolsec did on that occasion; but to say that he had done
   well, he must have been a downright madman.

   "Nor is there any better proof that the Master of Falais was of
   Bolsec's opinion on the subject of predestination. Calvin, Beza, and
   Castalio himself, (who would not have failed to mention it,) say no
   such thing. Besides this, the Confession of the Master of Falais, such
   as he had published in his Apology, is quite in unison with Calvin's
   sentiments; and it may be presumed that he had not renounced these
   views in three years afterwards, while experience tells us, that they
   have once imbibed. What was then, properly, the ground of quarrel
   between Calvin and the Master of Falais? In my opinion it was this:
   After Bolsec had been put in prison, on the 16th October 1551, for
   having contradicted the doctrine of Calvin, and given occasion of
   offense in the Church, Calvin was disposed to punish him with all
   possible severity. To accomplish his purpose in accordance with forms,
   he asked the opinion of the Churches of Switzerland, hinting to them at
   the same time what he desired from them."

   "We are desirous,' says he, to clear our Church from this pestilence in
   such a way that it will not, on being expelled from it, do injury to
   the neighboring Churches.' meaning, plainly enough, that he must either
   be put to death, or suffered to remain in prison during his whole
   life."

   The Master of Falais was of another mind; whether it was that he was
   influenced by a regard to his own interest, and that, being sickly, he
   imagined that his life depended on that of his physician; or whether it
   was that, from a principle of humanity and Christianity forbearance, he
   reckoned that Bolsec's imprudence did not merit so severe a punishment,
   he wrote to the clergy of the Cantons, or to his friends in that
   quarters, and thereby defeated the design of Calvin, who received
   replies less full and distinct, and much more moderate, than he had
   expected and desired. Calvin finding himself thwarted by the Master of
   Falais, got into a passion, broke entirely with him, and roused up
   against him so many enemies at Geneva, that he was obliged to retire
   into the district of Vaud.

   "Judge, now, which of the two was in the right -- Calvin or the Master
   of Falais." "I do not know what became of the Master of Falais after
   this time, nor when he died, nor where, nor in what communion. I
   cannot, however, subscribe to the views of Mr. Bayle, who says that the
   Master of Falais turned aside from the doctrine of the Reformed, and
   that he renounced the Reformed Church. I am of opinion that Beza, on
   whose authority Mr. Bayle proceeds, means nothing more than this, that
   the Master of Falais left the Church of Geneva, on quarreling with
   Calvin. This does not mean that he renounced the Reformed Church, or
   abandoned the Protestant party. For it was possible to quarrel with
   Calvin, to reject his views on predestination and on persecution, and
   spurn the discipline of the Church of Geneva, and yet, after all, be as
   good a Protestant, and member of the Reformed Church, as Calvin
   himself."

   From the extracts furnished above form an introductory notice by the
   editor [5] of the work already referred to, ("Lettres de Calvin a Jaque
   de Bourgogne,") it will abundantly appear that the writer is desirous
   to present as favorable a view of James of Burgundy as the
   circumstances of the case will at all admit of. His attempt to show
   that James of Burgundy may have, after all, remained in connection with
   the Reformed Church, appears to be more ingenious than solid, and seems
   directly at variance with a statement by Calvin in his second
   Dedication to this part of his Commentaries, to this effect, that the
   individual to whom the former Dedication was addressed "has
   intentionally made it his object, not merely to withdraw as much as
   possible from me personally, but also to have no connection with our
   Church." [6] This expression naturally conveys the idea that he had not
   simply left the Church of Geneva, but had withdrawn entirely from the
   Reformed Church. But however matters may have been as to this, the
   case, as a whole, was of such a nature as could not fail to be painful
   in the extreme to the mind of Calvin. In proportion, however, to the
   pain excited in his mind by this distressing case, must have been the
   happiness afforded him by an occurrence of an opposite nature, which
   took place about the same time.

   The Church of Geneva, which had suffered from the defection of James of
   Burgundy, was strengthened by the accession of an Italian nobleman,
   Galeazus Caracciolus, who, having been led to espouse the Protestant
   faith, took up his residence at Geneva in the year 1551, with a view to
   enjoy the society of Calvin, and have opportunity of attending upon his
   ministry. The particulars of his history, and more especially of his
   conversion from Popery, are interestingly narrated in a work entitled
   -- "The Italian Convert -- Newes From Italy of A Second Moses -- The
   Life of Galeacius Caracciolus, The noble Marquesse of Vico," etc.
   London, 1635.

   This work was written originally in Italian, "by Nicola Balbani,
   minister of the Italian Church in Geneva. It was translated into Latin
   by Beza; into French by Minutoli and by Sieur de Lestan; and into
   English by William Crashaw." [7]

   The writer of this work referred to presents, in the dedicatory
   epistle, the following brief summary of the leading facts of this
   interesting case: --

   "I present you with as strange a story as, out of the holy stories,
   afore it be laid down at large? Thus it is: -- Galeacius Caracciolus,
   son and heir-apparent to Calantonius, Marquesse of Vicum in Naples,
   bred, borne and brought up in Popery -- a courtier to the Emperor
   Charles the Fifth, nephew to the Pope, Paul the Fourth, being married
   to the Duke of Nucerne's daughter, and having by her six goodly
   children, at a sermon of Peter Martyr's was first untouched, -- after
   reading Scripture, and other good means, was fully converted -- labored
   with his lady, but could not persuade her; therefore, that he might
   enjoy Christ and serve Him with a good conscience, he left his lands,
   livings and honors of a Marquesdome, the comforts of his lady and
   children, the pleasures of Italy, his credit with the Emperor, his
   kindred with the Pope, and forsaking all for the love of Jesus Christ,
   came to Geneva, and there lived a poor and mean, yet an honorable and a
   holy life for forty years; and though his father, his lady, his
   kinsmen, yea, the Emperor and Pope did all they could to reclaim him,
   yet continued he constant to the end, and lived and died the blessed
   servant of God, leaving behind him a rare example to all ages." [8]

   Caracciolus was born at Naples in January 1517. His father's name was
   Calantonius, who was descended from the ancient and noble family of the
   Caracciolies in the district of Capua, and was elevated by Charles the
   Fifth to the rank of Vico. His mother was descended from the noble
   family of the Caraffi, and was sister to Pope Paul the Fourth. His
   wife, Victoria, was daughter to the Duke of Nuceria, one of the
   principal noblemen of Italy. She brought him a large fortune. He had by
   her six children -- four sons and two daughters. His mind was first
   influenced in favor of the Protestant religion by repeated
   conversations held by him with a nobleman nearly related to him, who
   had, along with various persons of distinction in Italy, been induced
   to renounce Popery, chiefly through the instrumentality of a Spanish
   nobleman, who at that time resided at Naples -- Joannes Waldesius. The
   more immediate instrument, however, of his conversion, was the
   celebrated Peter Martyr Vermilius. Caracciolus having from curiousity
   gone to hear him, was savingly impressed by what he heard; and it is to
   be noticed as an interesting coincidence, that the means of his
   conversion was a discourse on a passage in the First Epistle to the
   Corinthians.

   "At that time Peter Martyr was in hand with Paul's First Epistle to the
   Corinthians, and as he was showing the weakness and deceitfulness of
   the judgment of man's reason in spiritual things, as likewise the power
   and efficacy of the Word of God in those men in whom the Lord worketh
   by His Spirit -- amongst other things he used this simile or
   comparison: If a man, walking in a large place, see afar off men and
   women dancing together, and hear no sound of instrument, he will judge
   them mad, or at least foolish; but if he come nearer them, and perceive
   their order and hear their music, and mark their measures and their
   courses, he will then be of another mind, and not only take delight in
   seeing them, but feel a desire in himself to bear them company and
   dance with them. Even the same (said Martyr) betides many men, who,
   when they behold in others a sudden and great change of their looks,
   apparel, behavior, and whole course of life, at the first sight they
   impute to melancholy, or some other foolish humor; but if they look
   more narrowly into the matter, and begin to hear and perceive the
   harmony and sweet consent of God's Spirit, and His word in them, by the
   joint power of which two this change was made and wrought, (which afore
   they counted folly,) then they change their opinion of them, and first
   of all begin to like them, and that change in them, and afterwards feel
   in themselves a motion and desire to imitate them, and to be of the
   number of such men, who, forsaking the world and his vanities, do think
   that they ought to reform their lives by the rule of the gospel, that
   so they may come to true and sound holiness. This comparison, by the
   grace of God's Spirit, wrought so wonderfully with Galeacius, as
   himself hath often told more carefully to restrain his affections from
   following the world and his pleasures, as before they did, and to set
   his mind about seeking out the truths of religion and the way to true
   happiness... And thus far, in this short time, had the Lord wrought
   with him by that sermon: -- as first, to consider with himself
   seriously whether he were right or no: secondly, to take up an exercise
   continual of reading Scripture: thirdly, to change his former company
   and make choice of better. And this time was done in the year 1541, and
   in the four and twentieth year of his age."

   Caracciolus having thus had his eyes opened to the errors of Popery,
   and being fully satisfied that it was his duty to embrace the
   Protestant faith, found himself placed in peculiarly trying
   circumstances. Even those of his countrymen who were personally
   inclined towards the Protestant cause could not be persuaded to hold
   meetings in private for their mutual edification, but were prepared not
   merely to conceal their real sentiments, but even to practice
   occasional conformity to the rites of Popery. In these circumstances he
   was called to consider whether he would be prepared to spend the
   remainder of his life in daily violation of the dictates of conscience,
   or forsake all for Christ.

   "The sacrifice of his secular dignities and possessions did not cost
   him a sigh, but as often as he reflected on the distress which his
   departure would inflict on his aged father, who, with parental pride,
   regarded him as the heir of his titles and the stay of his family, --
   or his wife whom he loved, and by whom he was loved tenderly, and on
   the dear pledges of their union, he was thrown into a state of
   unutterable anguish, and started back with horror from the resolution
   to which conscience had brought him. At length, by an heroic effort of
   zeal, which few can imitate and many will condemn, he came to the
   determination of bursting the tenderest ties which perhaps ever bound
   man to country and kindred." [9]

   The reader will observe that the author of the work already referred to
   -- "The Life of Galeacius Caracciolus," etc., entitles it -- "The
   Italian Convert -- Newes from Italy of a Second Moses" -- and in
   accordance with this title the writer, in the dedicatory epistle
   prefixed to the work, institutes a comparison between Moses and the
   subjects of his narrative in a variety of interesting particulars.

   "I may say much rather than Jacob -- Few and evil have my days been;
   yet in these few days of mine something have I seen, more have I read,
   more have I heard; yet never saw I, heard I, or read I any example (all
   things laid together) more nearly seconding the examples of Moses than
   this of the most renowned Marquesse Galeacius. Moses was the adopted
   son of a king's daughter; Galeacius the natural son and heir apparent
   to a Marquesse; Moses a courtier in the court of Pharoah, Galeacius in
   the court of the emperor Charles the Fifth; Moses by adoption a kin to
   a Queen, Galeacius by marriage to a Duke, by blood son to a Marquesse,
   nephew to a Pope; Moses in possibility of a kingdom, he in possession
   of a Marquesdome; Moses in his youth brought up in the heathenism of
   Egypt, Galeacius schooled in the superstition of Popery; Moses at last
   saw the truth and embraced it, so did Galeacius; Moses openly fell from
   the heathenism of Egypt, so did Galeacius from the superstition of
   Popery. But all this is nothing to that which they both suffered for
   their conscience. What Moses suffered Saint Paul tells us -- Moses,
   when he was come to years, refused to be called the son of Pharoah's
   daughter, and chose rather to suffer adversities with the people of
   God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming the
   rebuke of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt.' Nay,
   Moses had rather be a base brick maker amongst the oppressed
   Israelites, being true Christians, than to be the son of a king's
   daughter in the court of Pharaoh amongst idolaters. In like case noble
   Galeacius, when he was come to years and knowledge of Christ, refused
   to be called son and heir to a Marquesse, cup-bearer to an Emperor,
   nephew to a Pope, and chose rather to suffer affliction, persecution,
   banishment, loss of lands, livings, wife, children, honors and
   preferments, than to enjoy the sinful pleasures of Italy for a season,
   esteeming the rebuke of Christ greater riches than the honors of a
   Marquesdome without Christ, and therefore, seeing he must either want
   Christ or want them, he despoiled himself of all these to gain Christ.
   So excellent was the fact of Moses, and so heroical, that the Holy
   Ghost vouchsafes it remembrance both in the Old and New Testament, that
   so the Church in all ages might know it and admire it, and doth
   chronicle it in the epistle to the Hebrews almost two thousand years
   after it was done. If God himself did so to Moses, shall not God's
   Church be careful to commend to posterity this second Moses, whose love
   to Christ Jesus was so zealous, and so inflamed by the heavenly fire of
   God's Spirit, that no earthly temptations could either quench or abate
   it; but to win Christ, and to enjoy Him in the liberty of His Word and
   Sacraments, he delicately contemned the honors and pleasures of the
   Marquesdome of Vicum -- Vicum, one of the paradises of Naples, Naples,
   the paradise of Italy -- Italy of Europe -- Europe of the earth; yet
   all these paradises were nothing to him in comparison of attaining the
   celestial paradise, there to live with Jesus Christ."

   "And for my part I freely and truly profess, I have been often ravished
   with admiration of this noble example -- to see an Italian so excellent
   a Christian -- one so near the Pope so near to Jesus Christ, and such
   blessed fruit to blossom in the Pope's own garden; and to see a
   nobleman of Italy forsake that for Christ, for which I fear many
   amongst us would forsake Christ Himself. And surely (I confess truth)
   the serious consideration of this so late, so true, so strange an
   example hath been a spur to my slowness, and whetted my dull spirits,
   and made me to esteem more highly of religion than I did before. I know
   it is an accusation of myself, and a disclosing of my own shame to
   confess thus much; but it is a glory to God, an honor to religion, a
   credit to the truth, and a praise to this noble Marquesse, and
   therefore I will not hide it. And why should I shame to confess it,
   when that famous and renowned man of God, holy Calvin, freely
   confesseth, [10] as in the sequel of this story you shall hear, that
   this nobleman's example did greatly confirm him in his religion, and
   did revive and strengthen his faith, and cheer up all the holy graces
   of God in him."

   Caracciolus had no sooner left Naples, forsaking country and kindred
   for the sake of Christ and his gospel, than every possible effort was
   employed by his family and relatives, and all that were concerned for
   the credit of the religion that he had abandoned, to induce him to
   return.

   On his refusing to do so, "sentence was passed against him, and he was
   deprived of all the property which he inherited from his mother." "In
   the following year... an offer was made to him in the name of his uncle
   now Pope Paul IV., [11] that he should have a protection against the
   Inquisition, provided he would take up his residence within the
   Venetian States; a proposal to which neither his safety nor the
   dictates of his conscience would permit him to accede." He went
   repeatedly to Italy, and had interviews with his aged father, but was
   refused the privilege of seeing his wife and family, until about six
   years after he had quitted Naples. His wife, Victoria, then wrote to
   him, earnestly requesting an interview with him, and fixing the place
   of meeting. This she did on two different occasions, but in both
   instances, on his arrival at the appointed place, after a fatiguing and
   dangerous journey, he had the disappointment of finding that she did
   not make her appearance. At length, impatient of delay, he went once
   more to Italy, and at his father's house had an interview with
   Victoria, when he entreated her to accompany him to Geneva, "promising
   that no restraint should be laid on her conscience, and that she should
   be at liberty to practice her religion under his roof. After many
   protestations of affection, she finally replied, that she could not
   reside out of Italy, nor in a place where any other religion than that
   of the Church of Rome was professed, and farther, that she could not
   live with him as her husband so long as he was infected with heresy."
   The scene at their final parting was peculiarly tender. "Bursting into
   tears, and embracing her husband, Victoria besought him not to leave
   her a widow, and her babies fatherless. The children joined in the
   entreaties of their mother, and the eldest daughter, a fine girl of
   thirteen, grasping his knees, refused to part with him. How he
   disengaged himself, he knew not; for the first thing which brought him
   to recollection was the noise made by the sailors on reaching the
   opposite shore of the Gulf." (of Venice.) "He used often to relate to
   his intimate friends, that the parting scene continued long to haunt
   his mind; and that not only in dreams, but also in reveries into which
   he fell during the day; he thought he heard the angry voice of his
   father, saw Victoria in tears, and felt his daughter dragging at his
   heels." [12]

   Caracciolus spent the remainder of his days at Geneva, with the
   exception of five years spent by him at Nion and Lausanne, for the sake
   of economy in his living, and continued steadfast in his attachment to
   the Protestant faith. He was on terms of intimate friendship with
   Calvin, which continued unbroken until the death of the Reformer in
   1564 -- thirteen years subsequent to the time when Carcciolus went to
   reside at Geneva. One step taken by him during his exile must be
   regarded as (to say the least) of greatly questionable propriety --
   that of contracting a second marriage, about nine years after he went
   to reside at Geneva. Calvin, on being consulted by him as to the
   propriety of such a step, "felt great scruples as to the expediency" of
   it, but "ultimately gave his approbation to it, after he had consulted
   the divines of Switzerland and the Grisons." [13] Accordingly, the
   courts of Geneva having legally pronounced a sentence of divorce
   against Victoria, on the ground of her obstinate refusal to live with
   her husband, he married Anne Fremejere, the widow of a French refugee
   from Rouen, with whom he continued to live happily in a state of
   dignified frugality. [14] He was held, deservedly, by the Church of
   Geneva, and wherever he was known, in the greatest esteem, as one whose
   piety was of a very high order. Matthew Henry, in one part of his
   Writings, [15] makes mention of "a noble saying of the Marquis of Vico,
   Let their money perish with them, who esteem all the wealth of this
   world worth one hour's communion with God in Jesus Christ,'" and
   assuredly the devotedness manifested by him to the cause of Christ
   affords ample evidence that the sentiment was deeply inwrought into his
   mind. He died at Geneva in 1568, in the sixty-eighth year of his age.

   Calvin's Commentary on Paul's Epistles to the Corinthians having, (in
   common with a large portion of his Commentaries on other parts of the
   Scriptures) been translated by himself into French for the benefit of
   his countrymen, the Latin original and French version have been
   carefully collated, and any additional terms or clauses that occur in
   the latter, tending to bring out more fully the Author's meaning, will
   be found given at the bottom of the page. "Calvin," says Pasquier
   (Biographia Evangelica) "was a good writer, both in Latin and French,
   and our French tongue is highly obliged to him for enriching it with so
   great a number of fine expressions." D'Aubigne, when speaking of
   Calvin's early education, states that "he made great progress in Latin
   literature. He became familiar with Cicero, and learned from this great
   master to employ the language of the Romans with a facility, purity,
   and ease that excite the admiration even of his enemies. But at the
   same time, he found riches in this language which he afterwards
   transferred to his own." "CALVIN when called upon to discuss and to
   prove, enriched his mother-tongue with modes of connection and
   dependence, with shadows, transitions, and dialectic forms, that it did
   not as yet possess." [16]

   The Old English Translation of this part of Calvin's Commentaries
   having been published in black letter in 1573, about thirty years after
   the Commentary itself was first published by Calvin, it is not to be
   wondered that it abounds with obsolete terms and phrases, fitted to
   render it unpalatable to modern taste. In addition to this, the
   Author's meaning has, in not a few instances, been manifestly
   misapprehended, and in almost all cases Calvin's critical observations
   are entirely omitted. The Translator, Mr. Thomas Timme, was the author
   of various works, one of which more particularly -- quaintly entitled
   "A Silver Bell," appears to have gained much celebrity. It has been
   thought proper to subjoin to this Preface, a fac-simile of the
   title-page to this old English version, with a copy of "The Epistle
   Dedicatorie" to the Archbishop of Canterbury.

   In preparing the present Translation of this part of Calvin's
   Commentaries, care has been taken to bring out as fully as possible the
   Author's meaning, while the reader will find in a variety of instances
   in the Notes some additional light thrown on some important but
   difficult passages -- derived chiefly from the labors of interpreters
   that have appeared subsequently to the times of Calvin. The Translator
   is fully persuaded that Calvin's Commentaries on both of Paul's
   Epistles to the Corinthians will be found, in so far at least as the
   Author's meaning is properly brought out in the Translation, to justify
   most amply the confident expectation of the Author himself, (as
   expressed in his first Dedication to the Commentary on the First
   Epistle) -- that it would "furnish no ordinary assistance for
   thoroughly understanding Paul's mind."

   J.P.
   Elgin, October 1848.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] Kirch-hoffer's Life of Farel, pp. 281, 282.

   [2] Mackenzie's Life of Calvin, p. 63.

   [3] "Un monument authentique;" -- "An authentic moment."

   [4] "Entier amy a jamais;" -- "Thorough friend for ever."

   [5] "Avertissement de l'Editeur."

   [6] "Nihil haberet cum Ecclesia nostria commune;" -- "De n'avoir rien
   de commun avec nostre Eglise;" -- Might have nothing in common with our
   Church.

   [7] M'Crie's History of the Reformation in Spain. -- Note.

   [8] Baxter, in his "Treatise of Conversion," makes the following
   interesting allusion to the case of Caracciolus: -- "As it was with
   Carraciolus, the Marquis of Vicum, when his conscience bid him leave
   his land, and friends, and all for Christ, to forsake Popery, and
   betake himself to these countries where he might enjoy the gospel, his
   house and lands then came in his eyes: What! must I leave all these for
   mere conscience, and live I know not how.' His wife hangs upon him, his
   children with tears do cry after him, O father! leave us not.' And many
   a sob and sigh it costs his heart before he could resolve to get away."
   -- Baxter's Works, volume 7. -- Ed.

   [9] M'Crie's History of the Reformation in Spain.

   [10] The reader will find the statement referred to in the second
   dedication prefixed by Calvin to his commentary on 1st Corinthians --
   "Caeterum quia et ego, quantum ad fidei meae pietatisque confirmationem
   valeat tuum exemplum experior," etc.; -- "As however I, for my part,
   know by experience the tendencies of your example to strengthen my
   faith and piety," etc. -- Ed.

   [11] It is remarked by David Dundas Scott, Esq., Translator of Ranke's
   History of the Popes of Rome, in connexion with the case of certain
   relatives of Pope Paul IV. who had incurred his sever displeasure, that
   "although Paul seems to have relaxed the stern severity of the
   archinquisitor in regard to his Protestant nephew, [Galeacius
   Caracciolus,] by permitting him to be dealt with in the way of
   remonstrance and bribery, when another would have been arrested and put
   to death, still the compulsory retirement of the latter, after
   literally leaving brethren and sisters, and father and mother, and wife
   and children, and lands for Christ's sake and the gospel' to Geneva,
   where he spent the evening of his days as a ruling-elder in the Italian
   Reformed Church, presented a striking contrast to the brilliant
   fortunes of his cousins the Caraffas, during their enjoyment of the
   Papal favor. But when the Pope found these ungrateful, and when that
   favor was lost, the Genevan exile [Caracciolus] must have felt
   peculiarly thankful for the deliverance he had had from such tempations
   and reverses, and one can hardly suppose but that the Pope himself must
   have been affected by the contrast at all points between his many Roman
   Catholic and one Reformed relative." -- Ranke's History of the Romish
   Popes,. Note.

   [12] M'Crie's History of the Reformation in Spain.

   [13] The part which Calvin acted as to this matter will be found to be
   in exact accordance with the [2]views expressed by him, when commenting
   on 1 Corinthians 7:15 -- a passage on which opposite opinions have been
   entertained by eminent interpreters. It may be noticed in connexion
   with this case, that the United Brethren, when laboring in the West
   India Islands, near the close of the last century, felt greatly at a
   loss as to the course proper to be pursued in the case of converted
   negroes, whose husbands or wives had (as very frequently happened) been
   purchased by proprietors from other islands, and were, in consequence
   of this, parted from them for ever. "For some time" they "prohibited
   the converts from contracting another marriage, apprehending this to be
   inconsistent with the principles of Christianity." Afterwards, however,
   in particular cases, they judged it better "not to hinder," though they
   "did not advise, a regular marriage with another person." -- Brown's
   History of Misssions, volume 1.

   [14] M'Crie's History of the Reformation in Spain,

   [15] Communicant's Companion.

   [16] D'Aubigne's History of the Reformation, (Oliver and Boyd's
   Edition,) volume 3.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Facsimile of the title page to the 1573 English Translation
     __________________________________________________________________

   A COMMENTARY

   UPON SAINT PAUL'S

   EPISTLES TO THE CORINTHIANS

   WRITTEN BY M JOHN CALVIN;

   And translated out of Latin into English, by

   Thomas Timme, Minister.

   Imprinted at London, for

   John Harifon and George Byfhop.

   1573.

   To the Most Reverend Father
   in God, and His Singuler Good Lord, Edmond,
   by the Grace of God, Archbishop of Canterburie,
   Primate and Metropolitiane of all England, Thomas Timme
   wisheth the plentifull riches of the Spirite,
   in Christ Iesu

   After long exercise in translating such Latine Commentaries uppon the
   holy Scriptures, as I though most like to further my country men, which
   understand not that tongue, to the soud knowledg of true Religion: at
   last I tooke in hand M. Caluin's exposition upon Saint Paul's Epistles
   to the Corinthias. And, as in my poor judgment, the writer is a most
   excellent instrument of God, for the simple setting foorth of his
   trueth, so in making my choyse (most reverend Father) I could not
   devise with my selfe, a more fyt personage, to whom I might dedicate
   his trauayle, by my willing paynes translated, than to your Grace: So
   much the rather, for that as your selfe can skillfully iudge, so they,
   for whom I have taken this labor upon me, by your allowance (whereon
   they may and will rest) shalbe the more encouraged to lyke, and with
   greater diligence to reade, and to take the profite ment them thereby.
   And although my part herein by the least, and in respect thereof,
   unwoorthye to be presented to your hands, your worthines in eche
   condition considered: yet calling to mynde the benefites, which long
   ago in Cambridge, and els where since, I haue receyued by your Graces
   preferment: I thought it better nowe at the last, to aduenture the
   offer of this simple gift, being such as I haue, than utterly to shewe
   myself unthankeful for that I have receyued. Most humbly therefore
   beseeching your Grace, that as heretofore it hath pleased you to
   encourage me in this exercise, by licensing the first booke which I
   translated to passe the Englishe presse, so now you will vouchsafe to
   take in good part M. Caluin's present, offered you by me. I ceasse to
   trouble you further, recommending your Grace, and all your godly
   affayres to almighty God, whom I heartely beseeche to direct in all
   heauenly wisdome, grace, and knowledge, now and euer.

   Your Graces most humble at all tymes,
   to commaunde, Thomas Tymme.
     __________________________________________________________________

   THE AUTHOR'S FIRST EPISTLE DEDICATORY

   TO THAT ILLUSTRIOUS MAN, JAMES OF BURGUNDY,
   MASTER OF FALAIS AND BREDA

   Would that this my Commentary, in which I have attempted to expound an
   Epistle not less obscure than useful, published, as it now is, in
   accordance with the earnest solicitations of many for a long time past,
   and even reiterated demands, may be correspondingly answerable to the
   hopes and wishes of all! I say this, not with the view of earning from
   this work any need of praise -- an ambition that ought to be quite away
   from the minds of Christ's servants -- but from a desire that it may do
   good at all, which it cannot do, if it does meet with acceptance. I
   have, for my part, labored with the utmost faithfulness, and with no
   less diligence, that it may, without any show, be of the greatest
   service to the Church of God. How far I have succeeded, my readers will
   judge for themselves.

   This much at least I am confident that I have secured -- that it will
   furnish no ordinary assistance for thoroughly understanding Paul's
   mind. That it will to you, most illustrious Sir, prove exceedingly
   acceptable, is so far from appearing to me doubtful, that I find it
   necessary even to warn you against allowing yourself to be carried
   beyond due bounds by an undue attachment to me, though, if it should so
   happen, I shall nevertheless regard your judgment as of so much
   importance, that I shall reckon myself to have succeeded admirably in
   my labors, if they have secured your unqualified approbation.

   In dedicating my Work to you, [17] however, I have not been influenced
   solely by the hope of its being acceptable to you, but by various other
   considerations; and more especially this, that your personal character
   corresponded admirably with the argument of Paul's Epistle. For while
   too many in the present day convert the Gospel into a cold and shadowy
   philosophy, imagining that they have sufficiently discharged their
   duty, if they simply give a nod of assent to what they hear, you, on
   the other hand, are an illustrious pattern of that living efficacy,
   [18] which Paul testifies, ought to breathe in the Gospel. This,
   assuredly, I do not mention on your account, but because I consider it
   to be of great importance by way of example.

   It would have been an important point gained, though there had been
   nothing more than this, that, in the first order of nobility, in the
   elevated station of honor which you had obtained, and amidst a large
   abundance of fortune and wealth, (situations in life that are all of
   them at the present day overrun with so many corruptions,) you have
   yourself lived moderately and temperately, and have regulated your
   household in a chaste and honorable discipline. You have done both
   admirably. For you have conducted yourself in such a manner, as to lead
   all to perceive, by clear tokens, that you are altogether free from
   ambition. While retaining your splendor, as was necessary, it has been
   in such a manner, that, moderate as has been your style of living, no
   symptom of meanness was to be seen; while, at the same time, it was
   abundantly apparent that you avoided magnificence rather than courted
   it. You have shown yourself affable and kind to all, so that all were
   constrained to commend your moderation, while there was not even the
   slightest token of haughtiness or insolence to give offense to any one.
   As to your household, suffice it to say, in one word, that is has been
   regulated in such a manner, as to reflect the mind and manners of the
   Lord, as a mirror does the person. Even this would have been an
   illustrious and rare pattern of virtue for imitation.

   I reckon it, however, of much greater importance, that while you have
   been groundlessly charged before the Emperor, through the calumnies of
   wicked men, and that, too, simply because Christ's kingdom, whenever it
   begins to flourish in any quarter, drives them to madness and fury, you
   bear up with unconquerable magnanimity, and are now in exile from your
   native country, with no less credit than you had when adorning it
   previously with your presence. Other things I pass over, because it
   were tedious to enlarge. It ought indeed to be more than simply common
   and customary among Christians, not merely to leave contentedly behind
   them estates, castles, and princely domains, for Christ's sake, but
   even cheerfully and willingly to despise in comparison with Him every
   thing that is most valued under heaven. In consequence, however, of the
   backwardness and indifference, too, of almost all of us, as the virtue
   itself is worthy of special admiration, so when it is seen in you so
   conspicuously, I do most earnestly desire that it may stir up many to a
   desire of emulation, that they may not in future be always lurking idly
   in their nests, but may at length discover openly some spark, if they
   have any, of Christian spirit.

   As to your being assaulted from time to time with fresh accusations by
   those who are manifestly the infuriated enemies of piety, they will
   gain nothing by this, except to make themselves more and more odious by
   their gross indulgence in falsehood. At least every man in his senses,
   perceives that they are mad dogs, that would fain tear you in pieces,
   and when they cannot bite, take revenge upon themselves by barking. It
   is well that they do so at a distance, so as to be perfectly harmless.
   From the injuries of the wicked, however, much as they have diminished
   your pecuniary resources, there has accrued to you no less glory among
   the pious. You, however, as becomes a Christian, look beyond this. For
   you rest satisfied with nothing short of the heavenly glory, which is
   laid up for us with God, and will be manifested, so soon as "our
   outward man perishes." -- (2 Corinthians 4:16.)

   Farewell, most illustrious Sir, with your noble partner. The Lord Jesus
   long preserve you both in safety for the spread of His kingdom, and
   always triumph in you over Satan, and the whole band of his troops!

   Geneva, 24th January 1546.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [17] In the interesting volume already referred to -- "Lettres de
   Calvin a Jaque de Bourgogne" -- there is preserved the original letter
   of Calvin to James of Burgundy, (received on the 6th February 1546,)
   requesting permission to dedicate to him the Commentary on the First
   Epistle to the Corinthians. The following translation of such parts of
   said letter as bear upon this point, will be interesting to the reader:
   -- "Since my letter was written, I have taken another thought as to the
   Dedicatory Epistle to my Commentary; for as there is much trouble and
   difficulty in binding one's self to fill up a certain number of pages,
   and no more, I send it quite complete. At the same time it is with the
   understanding, that it is not to be printed, except by your order.
   Accordingly I enclose it in this, in order that Vendelin may not have
   it otherwise than through your hands. If it does not appear to you
   expedient that I should address it to you, I shall, on receiving notice
   to that effect, prepare a new one. "Be not surprised, however, if I
   speak of you briefly; for I was afraid of coming upon some thorny
   points by going into more detail. But, according as matters shall turn
   out, we shall be able, God willing, in the second impression, to
   present fully in detail everything that will be necessary." In a
   subsequent letter to James of Burgundy, (received on the 2nd April
   1546,) Calvin expresses in the following terms his high satisfaction on
   receiving permission to dedicate the Commentary to him: -- "I give
   praise to our Lord, because the present of my Commentary is agreeable
   to you." (Lettres de Calvin, etc.) -- Ed.

   [18] Among other passages in the First Epistle to the Corinthians,
   which Calvin may be supposed to have had more particularly in his eye,
   there are the following, -- 1:24; 2:4; and 4:20. In commenting on the
   last of these passages, he complains, as above, of the very general
   lack in his times of "spiritualis efficacia," (spiritual efficacy.) --
   Ed.
     __________________________________________________________________

   THE AUTHOR'S
   SECOND EPISTLE DEDICATORY

   TO LORD GALLIAZUS CARACCIOLUS:

   A Nobleman, Distinguished Still More By Eminent Virtues Than By
   Illustrious Descent, Only Son And Rightful Heir Of The Marquis Of Vico,
   Health: --

   Would that when this Commentary first saw the light, I had either not
   known at all, or else had known thoroughly the individual whose name,
   hitherto inscribed upon this page, I am now under the necessity of
   erasing! I have, it is true, no fear of his upbraiding me with
   fickleness, or complaining that I have taken from him what I had
   previously given, for having intentionally made it his object, not
   merely to withdraw as much as possible from me personally, but also to
   have no connection with our Church, he has left himself no just ground
   of complaint. It is, however, with reluctance that I deviate from my
   custom, so as to erase any one's name from my writings, and it grieves
   me that that individual should have quitted the lofty eminence that I
   had assigned him, [19] so as not to hold out a light to others, as it
   was my desire that he should. [20] As, however, it is not in my power
   to remedy this evil, let him, so far as I am concerned, remain buried,
   as I am desirous even now of sparing his credit by not mentioning his
   name.

   To you, however, most illustrious Sir, I should have had to look out
   for some apology, for now putting you in his place, did I not freely
   take this liberty, from the confidence that I have in your incredible
   kindness of disposition, and your affection towards me personally,
   which is well known to all our friends. To return again to wishes,
   would that I had known you ten years sooner, for I should not have had
   occasion at present for making any change. So far as an example to the
   Church generally is concerned, it is a fortunate circumstance; because
   there will not only be no loss incurred by burying in oblivion the
   individual who has withdrawn from us, but in place of him we shall have
   in you a compensation [21] much more abundant and every way superior.
   For although you do not court public applause -- satisfied to have God
   alone as your witness -- and though it is not my design to herald your
   praises, yet it were not proper to conceal altogether from my readers
   what is useful and profitable to be known: -- that a man, sprung from a
   family of the first rank, [22] prosperous in honors and wealth, blest
   with a spouse of the noblest descent and strictest virtue, a numerous
   offspring, domestic quiet and harmony, and happy in his entire
   condition in life, has, of his own accord, with the view of joining the
   camp of Christ, quitted his native country, has left behind him a
   fertile and lovely domain, a splendid patrimony, and a residence not
   less commodious than delightful, has stript himself of domestic
   splendor, has left father, wife, children, relatives, and connections,
   and after bidding farewell to so many worldly allurements, satisfied
   with our mean style, adopts our frugal and homely way of living, just
   as if he were one of ourselves. [23] I make mention, however, of these
   things to others, in such a way as not to overlook at the same time my
   own individual advantage; for if I hold up here, as in a mirror, your
   virtues before the eyes of my readers, in order that they may set
   themselves to imitate them, it were a shame if I, who have a nearer
   view of them, were not more keenly affected by a daily and distinct
   contemplation of them. As, however, I for my part know by experience
   the tendency of your example to strengthen my faith and piety, and all
   the children of God that live here acknowledge, as I do, that they have
   derived from this source no ordinary advantage, I have thought that it
   might be of importance, that, by my publishing it, the like benefit
   were made to flow out to a still greater distance. But for this, [24]
   it were utter folly to expatiate in the praises of a man, whose nature
   and disposition are at the farthest distance possible from ostentation,
   and that, too, before persons who are in foreign and far distant
   regions. Hence, if any considerable number to whom, in consequence of
   distance, you have been hitherto unknown, shall, on this admirable
   example being presented to them, prepare to imitate it, by leaving the
   nests to which they too fondly cling, I shall have obtained an ample
   reward for what I have written.

   It ought, indeed, to have been more than simply common and customary
   among Christians, not simply to leave contentedly behind them estates,
   castles, and princely domains, where Christ cannot be followed
   otherwise, but even cheerfully and willingly to despise, in comparison
   with Him, everything that is most valued under heaven. [25] Such,
   however, is the backwardness or rather indifference that pervades all
   of us, that, while many give a cold assent [26] to the doctrine of the
   gospel, scarcely one in a hundred will, for the sake of it, if he
   possesses the most insignificant little farm, allow himself to be torn
   from it. Scarcely one is induced, without the greatest difficulty, to
   renounce the smallest conveniences: so very far are they from being
   prepared to abandon, as were befitting, life itself. [27] Above all
   things, I should wish that all resembled you in that first of all
   excellences -- self-denial. For you are well prepared to bear witness
   to me, and I in like manner to you, how little pleasure we feel in
   cultivating the society of those, who, after leaving their native
   country, come at length to manifest, that they have not left their old
   dispositions behind them.

   As, however, it were better that my readers should revolve in their
   minds, more than I can express in words, I now turn to entreat, that
   God, who has encouraged you hitherto by the wonderful efficacy of His
   Spirit, may furnish you with an unconquerable perseverance unto the
   end. For I am well aware with what arduous conflicts God has exercised
   you, and from which, in accordance with your singular prudence, you
   conclude, that a hard and laborious warfare is still awaiting you. Well
   knowing, however, from ample experience, how necessary it is for us to
   have a hand held out to us from heaven, you will, of your own accord,
   unite with me in imploring from that source the gift of perseverance.
   As for myself, I will entreat Christ our King, to whom supreme power
   has been given by the Father, and in whose hands all the treasures of
   spiritual blessings have been deposited, that He may long preserve you
   safely to us for the spread of His kingdom; and that He may in you
   accomplish farther triumphs over Satan and his bands.

   24th January 1556, ten years after this Commentary was first published.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [19] "Par mon Epistre;" -- "By my Epistle."

   [20] "Par bon exemple;" -- "By a good example."

   [21] "On aura en vous pour recompense vn exemple;" -- "We shall have in
   you, by way of compensation, an example."

   [22] "Vn homme de maison anciene et grand parentage;" -- "A man of an
   ancient house and great parentage."

   [23] "Vit frugalement et selon la facon du commun peuple, ne plus ne
   moins qu'un autre d'entre nous le premier qu'on scache prendre;" -- "He
   lives frugally, and after the manner of the common people, neither more
   nor less than one of ourselves, the first that might be fixed upon."

   [24] "Autrement, si je n'auoye cest esgard;" -- "Otherwise, if I had
   not this in view."

   [25] The reader will observe that Calvin here repeats, in precisely the
   same words, a statement which had been made by him in his previous
   dedication to James of Burgundy, and unquestionably the conduct of
   Caracciolus still more strikingly exemplified the spirit of self-denial
   which Calvin here recommends. -- Ed.

   [26] "Consentent a la doctrine de l'Evangile tellement quellement, et
   comme faisans signe de la teste;" -- "They consent to the doctrine of
   the gospel in some sort of way, and as giving a nod of assent with the
   head."

   [27] "Pour ceste querelle;" -- "In that contest."
     __________________________________________________________________

   THE ARGUMENT

   ON THE

   FIRST EPISTLE TO THE

   CORINTHIANS

   The advantages of this Epistle are various and manifold; for it
   contains many special topics, [28] the handling of which successively
   in their order, will show how necessary they are to be known. Nay, it
   will appear in part from the argument itself, in the recital of which I
   shall study to be brief, yet in such a way as to take in the whole,
   without omitting any of the leading points.

   Corinth, as every one knows, was a wealthy and celebrated city of
   Achaia. While it was destroyed by L. Mummius for no other reason than
   that the advantageousness of its situation excited his suspicions,
   posterity afterwards rebuilt it for the same reason that Mummius had
   for destroying it. [29] The convenience of the situation, too,
   occasioned its being restored again in a short time. For as it had the
   Aegean Sea contiguous on the one side, and the Ionian on the other, and
   as it was a thoroughfare between Attica and the Peloponnesus, it was
   very conveniently situated for imports and exports. Paul, after
   teaching there for a year and a half, as Luke mentions in the Acts,
   constrained at length by the wickedness of the Jews, sailed thence into
   Syria (Acts 18:11, 18.) During Paul's absence false apostles had crept
   in, not, in my opinion, to disturb the Church openly with wicked
   doctrines, or designedly to undermine sound doctrine; but, priding
   themselves in the splendor and magnificence of their address, or
   rather, being puffed up with an empty loftiness of speech, they looked
   upon Paul's simplicity, and even the Gospel itself, with contempt. They
   afterwards, by their ambition, gave occasion for the Church being split
   into various parties; and, last of all, reckless as to every thing,
   provided only they were themselves held in estimation, made it their
   aim to promote their own honor, rather than Christ's kingdom and the
   people's welfare.

   On the other hand, as those vices prevailed at Corinth with which
   mercantile cities are wont to be particularly infested, -- luxury,
   pride, vanity, effeminacy, insatiable covetousness, and ambition; so
   they had found their way even into the Church itself, so that
   discipline was greatly relaxed. Nay more, purity of doctrine had
   already begun to decline, so that the main article of religion -- the
   resurrection of the dead -- was called in question. Yet amidst this
   great corruption in every department, they were satisfied with
   themselves, equally as though every thing had been on the best possible
   footing. Such are Satan's usual artifices. If he cannot prevent the
   progress of doctrine, he creeps forward secretly to make an attack upon
   it: if he cannot by direct falsehoods suppress it, so as to prevent it
   from coming forth to light, he digs secret mines for its overthrow; and
   in fine, if he cannot alienate men's minds from it, he leads them by
   little and little to deviate from it.

   As to those worthless persons, however, who had disturbed the
   Corinthian Church, it is not without good ground that I conclude that
   they were not open enemies of the truth. We see that Paul nowhere else
   spares false doctrines. The Epistles to the Galatians, to the
   Colossians, to the Philippians, and to Timothy, are short; yet in all
   of them he does not merely censure the false apostles, but also points
   out at the same time in what respects they injured the Church. Nor is
   it without good reason; for believers must not merely be admonished as
   to the persons whom they ought to shun, they must also be shown the
   evil against which they should be on their guard. I cannot therefore
   believe that, in this comparatively long Epistle, he was prepared to
   pass over in silence what he carefully insists upon in others that are
   much shorter. In addition to this, he makes mention of many faults of
   the Corinthians, and even some that are apparently trivial, so that he
   appears to have had no intention of passing over any thing in them that
   was deserving of reproof. Besides, he must, in any other view, be
   regarded as wasting many words in disputing against those absurd
   teachers and prating orators. [30] He censures their ambition; he
   reproves them for transforming the gospel into human philosophy; he
   shows that they are destitute of the efficacy of the Spirit, inasmuch
   as they are taken up with mere ornaments of speech, and seek after a
   mere dead letter; but not a word is there as to a single false
   doctrine. Hence I conclude that they were persons who did not openly
   take away any thing from the substance of the gospel, but, as they
   burned with a misdirected eagerness for distinction, I am of opinion
   that, with the view of making themselves admired, they contrived a new
   method of teaching, at variance with the simplicity of Christ. This
   must necessarily be the case with all that have not as yet thrown off
   self, that they may engage unreservedly in the Lord's work. The first
   step towards serving Christ is to lose sight of ourselves, and think
   only of the Lord's glory and the salvation of men. Farther, no one will
   ever be qualified for teaching that has not first himself tasted the
   influence of the gospel, so as to speak not so much with the mouth, as
   with the dispositions of the heart. Hence, those that are not
   regenerated by the Spirit of God -- not having felt inwardly the
   influence of the gospel, and know not what is meant when it is said
   that we must become new creatures, (John 3:7) have a dead preaching,
   whereas it ought to be lively and efficacious; and, with the view of
   playing off their part, they disfigure the gospel by painting it over,
   so as to make it a sort of worldly philosophy.

   Nor was it difficult for those of whom we are now speaking to
   accomplish this at Corinth. For merchants are usually led away with
   outward disguises, and they do not merely allow themselves to be
   imposed upon by the empty show with which they deceive others, but in a
   manner take delight in this. Besides, as they have delicate ears, so
   that they cannot bear to be rudely taken to task, so if they meet with
   teachers of the milder sort, that will handle them gently, they give
   them, as it were, a reward in turn by caressing them. [31] It is so, I
   grant, everywhere; but it is more especially common in wealthy and
   mercantile cities. Paul, who was in other respects a god-like man, and
   distinguished by admirable virtues, was, nevertheless, not adorned with
   outward elegance, and was not puffed up with show, with the view of
   setting himself off to advantage. In fine, as he was inwardly
   replenished with the genuine excellence of the Spirit, so he had
   nothing of outward show. He knew not to flatter, and was not concerned
   to please men. (Galatians 1:10.) The one object that he had in view
   was, that Christ might reign, himself and all others being brought
   under subjection to him. As the Corinthians were desirous of doctrine
   that was ingenious, rather than useful, the gospel had no relish for
   them. As they were eager for new things, Christ had now become stale.
   Or if they had not as yet fallen into these vices, they were,
   nevertheless, already of their own accord predisposed to corruptions of
   that nature. Such were the facilities afforded to the false apostles
   for adulterating the doctrine of Christ among them; for adulterated it
   is, when its native simplicity is stained, and in a manner painted
   over, so as to differ nothing from worldly philosophy. Hence, to suit
   the taste of the Corinthians, they seasoned their preaching in such a
   way that the true savor of the gospel was destroyed. We are now in
   possession of the design that Paul had in view in writing this Epistle.
   I shall now take in the sum of the argument, by noting down briefly the
   particular heads of discourse.

   He begins with an ascription of praise, [32] that is in effect an
   exhortation, that they should go on as they have begun, and in this way
   he soothes them beforehand, that he may make them the more docile.
   Immediately afterwards, however, he proceeds to chide them, making
   mention of the dissensions with which their Church was infested. Being
   desirous to cure this evil, he calls upon them to exchange haughtiness
   for humility. For he overthrows all the wisdom of the world, that the
   preaching of the Cross may alone be exalted. He also at the same time
   abases them as individuals, in exhorting them to look around and see
   what class of persons chiefly the Lord has adopted as members of his
   flock.

   In the second chapter he brings forward, by way of example, his own
   preaching, which, in the account of men, was base and contemptible, but
   had nevertheless been signalized by the influence of the Spirit. And in
   the meantime he unfolds at greater length the sentiment, that there is
   a heavenly and secret wisdom that is contained in the gospel, which
   cannot be apprehended by any acuteness or perspicacity of intellect, or
   by any perception of sense, and is not influenced by human reasonings,
   and needs no meretricious ornament of words or embellishment, but
   simply by the revelation of the Spirit comes to be known by the
   understandings of men, and is sealed upon their hearts. He at length
   comes to this conclusion, that the preaching of the gospel does not
   merely differ widely from the wisdom of the flesh, and consists in the
   abasement of the Cross, but cannot be estimated as to its true nature
   by the judgment of the flesh; and this he does, with the view of
   drawing them off from a mistaken confidence in their own judgment, by
   which they measured every thing amiss.

   The beginning of the third chapter contains the application of this
   last department of the subject to their case. For Paul complains, that,
   being carnal, they were scarcely capable of learning the first
   rudiments of the gospel. He intimates in this way, that the distaste
   which they had contracted for the word, arose from no fault in the word
   itself, but from their ignorance; and at the same time he indirectly
   admonishes them, that they need to have their minds renewed, before
   they will begin to judge aright. He afterwards shows in what estimation
   the ministers of the gospel ought to be held -- that it ought to be in
   such a way, that the honor given to them does not in any degree detract
   from the glory that is due to God -- as there is one Lord, and all are
   his servants: all are mere instruments; he alone imparts efficacy, and
   from him proceeds the entire result. He shows them, at the same time,
   what they ought to have as their aim -- to build up the Church. He
   takes occasion from this to point out the true and proper method of
   building aright. It is to have Christ alone as the foundation, and the
   entire structure harmonizing with the foundation. And here, having
   stated in passing that he is a wise master-builder, he admonishes those
   that come after him to make the end [33] correspond with the beginning.
   He exhorts also the Corinthians not to allow their souls to be
   desecrated by corrupt doctrines, inasmuch as they are temples of God.
   Here he again brings to naught proud fleshly wisdom, that the knowledge
   of Christ may alone be in estimation among believers.

   In the beginning of the fourth chapter he points out what is the office
   of a true apostle. And as it was their corrupt judgment that prevented
   them from recognizing him as such, putting it aside, he appeals to the
   day of the Lord. Farther, as he was contemptible in their view from an
   appearance of abasement, he teaches them that this ought to be regarded
   as an honor to him rather than a disgrace. He afterwards brings forward
   tokens, from which it might in reality appear that he had not consulted
   his own glory, or his own belly (Romans 16:18), but had with
   faithfulness devoted himself exclusively to Christ's work. He comes at
   length to infer what honor is due to him from the Corinthians. In the
   close of the chapter he recommends Timothy to them, until he shall come
   to them himself; and at the same time he forewarns them that, on his
   coming, he will openly discover how little account he makes of those
   empty boastings by which the false apostles endeavored to recommend
   themselves.

   In the fifth chapter he takes them to task, for silently tolerating an
   incestuous connection between a son-in-law and a mother-in-law, and
   instructs them that in connection with a crime of such enormity, there
   was good reason why they should be covered with shame, instead of being
   elated with pride. From this he passes on to lay down a general
   doctrine to this effect, that crimes of that nature ought to be
   punished with excommunication, that indulgence in sin may be repressed,
   and that the infection may not spread from one individual to the
   others.

   The sixth chapter consists chiefly of two parts. In the first he
   inveighs against law-suits, with which they harassed one another,
   before unbelievers, to the great dishonor of the gospel. In the second
   he reproves indulgence in fornication, which had come to such a pitch,
   that it was almost looked upon as a lawful thing. He sets out with a
   heavy threatening, and afterwards enforces that threatening with
   arguments.

   The seventh chapter contains a discussion in reference to virginity,
   marriage, and celibacy. So far as we may conjecture from Paul's words,
   a superstitious notion had become prevalent among the Corinthians of
   this nature -- that virginity was a distinguished, and in a manner
   angelic virtue, so that marriage was held by them in contempt, as
   though it had been a profane thing. With the view of removing this
   error, he teaches that every one must consider what his gift is, and
   not strive in this matter beyond his ability, inasmuch as all have not
   the same calling. Accordingly he shows who they are that may abstain
   from marriage, and what ought to be the design of abstaining from it;
   and on the other hand, who they are that ought to enter into the
   married state, and what is the true principle of Christian marriage.

   In the eighth chapter he prohibits them from having fellowship with
   idolaters in their impure sacrifices, or giving countenance to anything
   of such a nature as might injure weak consciences. And as they excused
   themselves on this pretext, that they did not by any means connect
   themselves with idolaters in any corrupt sentiment, inasmuch as they
   acknowledged in their heart one God, and regarded idols as empty
   contrivances, he sets aside this excuse, on this principle that every
   one ought to have a regard to his brethren, and that there are many
   weak persons whose faith might be staggered by such dissimulation.

   In the ninth chapter he shows that he requires from them nothing more
   than he himself practiced, that he may not be reckoned so unreasonable
   as to impose upon others a law that he did not himself observe. For he
   puts them in mind how he had voluntarily refrained from availing
   himself of the liberty granted him by the Lord, lest he should give
   occasion of offense to any one, and how he had, in things indifferent,
   put on as it were various appearances, with the view of accommodating
   himself to all, that they may learn from his example that no one should
   be so devoted to self as not to endeavor to accommodate himself to his
   brethren for their edification.

   Now as the Corinthians were highly satisfied with themselves, as we
   said in the outset, in the beginning of the tenth chapter he admonishes
   them, from the example of the Jews, not to deceive themselves by a
   mistaken confidence; for if they are puffed up on account of outward
   things and gifts of God, he shows that the Jews were not without
   similar ground of glorying, and yet all this availed them nothing,
   because they abused their privileges. After alarming them by this
   threatening he returns immediately to the subject on which he had
   previously entered, and shows how unseemly it is for those who partake
   of the Lord's Supper to be participants in the "table of devils," that
   being a shameful and insufferable pollution. He at length draws this
   conclusion, that all our actions should be regulated in such a manner
   as not to be an occasion of offense to any one.

   In the eleventh chapter he clears the public assemblies from certain
   corrupt observances, which were at variance with Christian decorum and
   propriety, and shows what gravity and modesty ought to be exercised
   when we stand in the view of God and angels. He takes them to task,
   however, chiefly for their corrupt administration of the Supper. He
   subjoins the method of correcting the abuse that had crept in, which is
   by calling them back to our Lord's original institution, as the only
   sure rule and permanent law of right acting.

   As, however, many abused spiritual gifts for purposes of ambition, he
   enters into a discussion, in the twelfth chapter, as to the purpose for
   which they are conferred by God, and also as to what is the proper and
   genuine use of them, which is, that by contributing mutually to each
   other's advantage, we may be united together in one body, that of
   Christ. This doctrine he illustrates by drawing a similitude from the
   human body, in which, although there are different members and various
   faculties, there is nevertheless such a symmetry and fellow-feeling,
   that what has been conferred on the members severally contributes to
   the advantage of the whole body -- and hence love is the best
   directress in this matter. [34]

   The subject he follows out at greater length, and illustrates it more
   fully in the thirteenth chapter. The sum is this -- that all things
   must be viewed in relation to love. He takes occasion from this to make
   a digression for the purpose of commending that virtue, that he may the
   more strongly recommend the pursuit of it, and may encourage the
   Corinthians the more to cultivate it.

   In the fourteenth chapter he begins to point out more particularly in
   what respect the Corinthians had erred in the use of spiritual gifts;
   and as mere show bulked so much in their estimation, he teaches them
   that in all things edification alone should be looked to. For this
   reason he prefers prophecy to all other gifts, as being more useful,
   while the Corinthians set a higher value on tongues, purely from empty
   show. In addition to this, he lays down the right order of procedure,
   and at the same time reproves the fault of sounding forth in unknown
   tongues without any advantage, while in the meantime the doctrine and
   exhortations, which ought ever to hold the foremost place, were left in
   the background. He afterwards forbids women to teach publicly, as being
   a thing unseemly.

   In the fifteenth chapter he inveighs against a very pernicious error,
   which, although we can scarcely suppose it to have spread generally
   among the Corinthians, had nevertheless taken possession of the minds
   of some of them to such a degree, that it was necessary that a remedy
   should be openly administered. He appears, however, to have
   intentionally delayed mentioning this matter until the close of the
   Epistle, for this reason -- that if he had set out with this, or had
   entered upon it immediately after commencing, they might have thought
   that they were all reckoned to be in fault. The hope of a resurrection,
   accordingly, he shows to be so necessary, that, if it is taken away,
   the whole gospel falls to pieces. Having established the doctrine
   itself by powerful arguments, he subjoins also the principle and manner
   of it. In fine, he carefully draws out a full discussion of this point.

   The sixteenth chapter consists of two parts. In the first of these he
   exhorts them to relieve the necessity of the brethren at Jerusalem.
   They were at that time pinched with famine, and they were cruelly
   treated by the wicked. The apostles had assigned to Paul the charge of
   stirring up the Churches of the Gentiles to afford them help. He
   accordingly exhorts them to lay up in store whatever they were inclined
   to contribute, that it might be transmitted to Jerusalem without delay.
   He at length concludes the Epistle with a friendly exhortation and
   congratulations.

   Hence we may gather, as I stated in the outset, that the Epistle is
   replete with most profitable doctrine, containing, as it does, a
   variety of discussions on many important topics.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [28] "Bonnes matieres, et points de doctrine;" -- "Good subjects and
   points of doctrines."

   [29] Strabo describes Mummius as "megalaphron mallon e philotechnos,"
   -- "a man of magnanimity rather than a lover of the arts." -- Ed

   [30] "Ces habiles docteurs, et plaisans harangueurs;" -- "Those expert
   teachers and pleasant orators."

   [31] "En flattant et mignardant ces bons maistres;" -- "By flattering
   and caressing these good master."

   [32] "En s'esiouissant de leur avancement en l'Evangile;" -- "While
   exulting in their profiency in the gospel."

   [33] "De leur besongne;" -- "Of their work."

   [34] "Ainsi, il conclud, que charite nous seruira d'vne bonne regle
   pour nous bien gouuerner en cest endroit;" -- "Thus, he concludes, that
   charity will furnish us with a good rule for directing us aright in
   this matter."
     __________________________________________________________________

   COMMENTARY ON THE

   FIRST EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS

   CHAPTER 1
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 1:1-3

   1. Paul, called to be an apostle of Jesus Christ through the will of
   God, and Sosthenes our brother,

   1. Paulus, vocatus apostolus Jesu Christi per voluntatem Dei, et
   Sosthenes frater,

   2. Unto the church of God which is at Corinth, to them that are
   sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be saints, with all that in every
   place call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both theirs and
   ours:

   2. Ecclesiae Dei quae est Corinthi, sanctificatis in Christo Jesu,
   vocatis sanctis, una cum omnibus qui invocant nomen Domini nostri Jesu
   Christi in quovis loco tam sui quam nostri: [35]

   3. Grace be unto you, and peace, from God our Father, and from the Lord
   Jesus Christ.

   3. Gratia vobis et pax a Deo Patre nostro, et Domino Jesu Christi.


   1. Paul, called to be an Apostle In this manner does Paul proceed, in
   almost all the introductions to his Epistles, with the view of
   procuring for his doctrine authority and favor. The former he secures
   to himself from the station that had been assigned to him by God, as
   being an Apostle of Christ sent by God; the latter by testifying his
   affection towards those to whom he writes. We believe much more readily
   the man whom we look upon as regarding us with affection, and as
   faithfully endeavoring to promote our welfare. In this salutation,
   therefore, he claims for himself authority, when he speaks of himself
   as an Apostle of Christ, and that, too, as called by God, that is, set
   apart by the will of God Now, two things are requisite in any one that
   would be listened to in the Church, and would occupy the place of a
   teacher; for he must be called by God to that office, and he must
   faithfully employ himself in the discharge of its duties. Paul here
   lays claim to both. For the name, Apostle, implies that the individual
   conscientiously acts the part of an ambassador for Christ (2
   Corinthians 5:19), and proclaims the pure doctrine of the gospel. But
   as no one ought to assume this honor to himself, unless he be called to
   it, he adds, that he had not rashly intruded into it, but had been
   appointed [36] to it by God.

   Let us learn, therefore, to take these two things together when we wish
   to ascertain what kind of persons we ought to esteem as ministers of
   Christ, -- a call to the office, and faithfulness in the discharge of
   its duties. For as no man can lawfully assume the designation and rank
   of a minister, unless he be called, so it were not enough for any one
   to be called, if he does not also fulfill the duties of his office. For
   the Lord does not choose ministers that they may be dumb idols, or
   exercise tyranny under pretext of their calling, or make their own
   caprice their law; but at the same time marks out what kind of persons
   they ought to be, and binds them by his laws, and in fine chooses them
   for the ministry, or, in other words, that in the first place they may
   not be idle, and, secondly, that they may confine themselves within the
   limits of their office. Hence, as the apostleship depends on the
   calling, so the man who would be reckoned an apostle, must show himself
   to be really such: nay more, so must every one who demands that credit
   be given him, or that his doctrine be listened to. For since Paul rests
   on these arguments for establishing his authority, worse than impudent
   were the conduct of that man who would think to have any standing
   without such proofs.

   It ought, however, to be observed, that it is not enough for any one to
   hold out to view the title to a call to the office, along with
   faithfulness in discharging its duties, if he does not in reality give
   proof of both. For it often happens that none boast more haughtily of
   their titles than those that are destitute of the reality; as of old
   the false prophets, with lofty disdain, boasted that they had been sent
   by the Lord. Nay, at the present day, what else do the Romanists make a
   noise about, but "ordination from God, and an inviolably sacred
   succession even from the Apostles themselves," [37] while, after all,
   it appears that they are destitute of those things of which they vaunt?
   Here, therefore, it is not boasting that is required, but reality. Now,
   as the name is assumed by good and bad alike, we must come to the test,
   that we may ascertain who has a right to the name of Apostle, and who
   has not. As to Paul, God attested his calling by many revelations, and
   afterwards confirmed it by miracles. The faithfulness must be estimated
   by this, -- whether or not he proclaimed the pure doctrine of Christ.
   As to the twofold call -- that of God and that of the Church -- see my
   Institutes. [38]

   An Apostle Though this name, agreeably to its etymology, has a general
   signification, and is sometimes employed in a general sense, to denote
   any kind of ministers, [39] yet, as a peculiar designation, it is
   applicable to those that were set apart by the Lord's appointment to
   publish the Gospel throughout the whole world. Now, it was of
   importance that Paul should be reckoned in that number, for two
   reasons, -- first, because much more deference was paid to them than to
   other ministers of the gospel; and, secondly, because they alone,
   properly speaking, had authority to instruct all the Churches.

   By the will of God While the Apostle is accustomed cheerfully to
   acknowledge himself indebted to God for whatever he has of good, he
   does so more especially in reference to his apostleship, that he may
   free himself from all appearance of presumption. And assuredly as a
   call to salvation is of grace, so also a call to the office of apostle
   is of grace, as Christ teaches in these words:

   "Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you,"
   (John 15:16.)

   Paul, however, at the same time indirectly intimates, that all who
   attempt to undermine his apostleship, or in any way oppose it, contend
   against an appointment of God. For Paul here makes no useless boast of
   honorary titles, but designedly vindicates his apostleship from
   malicious aspersions. For as his authority must have been sufficiently
   established in the view of the Corinthians, it would have been
   superfluous to make particular mention of "the will of God," had not
   wicked men attempted by indirect means to undermine that honorable rank
   which had been divinely assigned him.

   And Sosthenes our brother This is that Sosthenes who was ruler of the
   Jewish synagogue that was at Corinth, of whom Luke makes mention in
   Acts 18:17. His name is added for this reason, that the Corinthians,
   knowing his ardor and steadfastness in the gospel, could not but hold
   him in deserved esteem, and hence it is still more to his honor to be
   made mention of now as Paul's brother, than formerly as ruler of the
   synagogue

   2. To the Church of God which is at Corinth. It may perhaps appear
   strange that he should give the name of a Church of God to a multitude
   of persons that were infested with so many distempers, that Satan might
   be said to reign among them rather than God. Certain it is, that he did
   not mean to flatter the Corinthians, for he speaks under the direction
   of the Spirit of God, who is not accustomed to flatter. But [40] among
   so many pollutions, what appearance of a Church is any longer
   presented? I answer, the Lord having said to him, "Fear not: I have
   much people in this place" (Acts 18:9, 10;) keeping this promise in
   mind, he conferred upon a godly few so much honor as to recognize them
   as a Church amidst a vast multitude of ungodly persons. Farther,
   notwithstanding that many vices had crept in, and various corruptions
   both of doctrine and manners, there were, nevertheless, certain tokens
   still remaining of a true Church. This is a passage that ought to be
   carefully observed, that we may not require that the Church, while in
   this world, should be free from every wrinkle and stain, or forthwith
   pronounce unworthy of such a title every society in which everything is
   not as we would wish it. For it is a dangerous temptation to think that
   there is no Church at all where perfect purity is not to be seen. For
   the man that is prepossessed with this notion, must necessarily in the
   end withdraw from all others, and look upon himself as the only saint
   in the world, or set up a peculiar sect in company with a few
   hypocrites.

   What ground, then, had Paul for recognizing a Church at Corinth? It was
   this: that he saw among them the doctrine of the gospel, baptism, the
   Lord's Supper -- tokens by which a Church ought to be judged of. For
   although some had begun to have doubts as to the resurrection, the
   error not having spread over the entire body, the name of the Church
   and its reality are not thereby affected. Some faults had crept in
   among them in the administration of the Supper, discipline and
   propriety of conduct had very much declined: despising the simplicity
   of the gospel, they had given themselves up to show and pomp; and in
   consequence of the ambition of their ministers, they were split into
   various parties. Notwithstanding of this, however, inasmuch as they
   retained fundamental doctrine: as the one God was adored among them,
   and was invoked in the name of Christ: as they placed their dependence
   for salvation upon Christ, and, had a ministry not altogether
   corrupted: there was, on these accounts, a Church still existing among
   them. Accordingly, wherever the worship of God is preserved
   uninfringed, and that fundamental doctrine, of which I have spoken,
   remains, we must without hesitation conclude that in that case a Church
   exists.

   Sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be saints He makes mention of the
   blessings with which God had adorned them, as if by way of upbraiding
   them, at least in the event of their showing no gratitude in return.
   For what could be more base than to reject an Apostle through whose
   instrumentality they had been set apart as God's peculiar portion.
   Meanwhile, by these two epithets, he points out what sort of persons
   ought to be reckoned among the true members of the Church, and who they
   are that belong of right to her communion. For if you do not by
   holiness of life show yourself to be a Christian, you may indeed be in
   the Church, and pass undetected, [41] but of it you cannot be. Hence
   all must be sanctified in Christ who would be reckoned among the people
   of God. Now the term sanctification denotes separation This takes place
   in us when we are regenerated by the Spirit to newness of life, that we
   may serve God and not the world. For while by nature we are unholy, the
   Spirit consecrates us to God. As, however, this is effected when we are
   engrafted into the body of Christ, apart from whom there is nothing but
   pollution, and as it is also by Christ, and not from any other source
   that the Spirit is conferred, it is with good reason that he says that
   we are sanctified in Christ, inasmuch as it is by Him that we cleave to
   God, and in Him become new creatures.

   What immediately follows -- called to be saints -- I understand to
   mean: As ye have been called unto holiness. It may, however, be taken
   in two senses. Either we may understand Paul to say, that the ground of
   sanctification is the call of God, inasmuch as God has chosen them;
   meaning, that this depends on his grace, not on the excellence of men;
   or we may understand him to mean, that, it accords with our profession
   that we be holy, this being the design of the doctrine of the gospel.
   The former interpretation appears to suit better with the context, but
   it is of no great consequence in which way you understand it, as there
   is an entire agreement between the two following positions -- that our
   holiness flows from the fountain of divine election, and that it, is
   the end of our calling.

   We must, therefore, carefully maintain, that it is not through our own
   efforts that we are holy, but by the call of God, because He alone
   sanctifies those who were by nature unclean. And certainly it appears
   to me probable, that, when Paul has pointed out as it were with his
   finger the fountain of holiness thrown wide open, he mounts up a step
   higher, to the good pleasure of God, in which also Christ's mission to
   us originated. As, however, we are called by the gospel to harmlessness
   of life (Philippians 2:15,) it is necessary that this be accomplished
   in us in reality, in order that our calling may be effectual. It will,
   however, be objected, that, there were not many such among the
   Corinthians. I answer, that the weak are not excluded from this number;
   for here God only begins his work in us, and by little and little
   carries it forward gradually and by successive steps. I answer farther,
   that Paul designedly looks rather to the grace of God in them than to
   their own defects, that he may put them to shame for their negligence,
   if they do not act a suitable part.

   With all that call. This, too, is an epithet common to all the pious;
   for as it is one chief exercise of faith to call upon the name of God,
   so it is also by this duty chiefly that believers are to be estimated.
   Observe, also, that he says that Christ is called upon by believers,
   and this affords a proof of his divinity -- invocation being one of the
   first expressions of Divine homage. Hence invocation here by synecdoche
   [42] (kata sunekdochen) denotes the entire profession of faith in
   Christ, as in many passages of Scripture it is taken generally for the
   whole of Divine worship. Some explain it as denoting mere profession,
   but this appears to be meager, and at variance with its usual
   acceptation in Scripture. The little words nostri (ours) and sui
   (theirs) I have put in the genitive, understanding them as referring to
   Christ, while others, understanding them as referring to place, render
   them in the ablative. In doing so I have followed Chrysostom. This
   will, perhaps, appear harsh, as the expression in every place is
   introduced in the middle, but in Paul's Greek style there is nothing of
   harshness in this construction. My reason for preferring this rendering
   to that of the Vulgate is, that if you understand it as referring to
   place, the additional clause will be not merely superfluous, but
   inappropriate. For what place would Paul call his own? Judea they
   understand him to mean; but on what ground? And then, what place could
   he refer to as inhabited by others? "All other places of the world"
   (say they;) but this, too, does not suit well. On the other hand, the
   meaning that I have given it suits most admirably; for, after making
   mention of all that in every place call upon the name of Christ our
   Lord, he adds, both theirs and ours, manifestly for the purpose of
   showing that Christ is the one common Lord, without distinction, of all
   that call upon him, whether they be Jews or Gentiles.

   In every place This Paul has added, contrary to his usual manner; for
   in his other Epistles he makes mention in the salutation of those only
   for whom they are designed. He seems, however, to have had it in view
   to anticipate the slanders of wicked men, that they might not have it
   to allege that, in addressing the Corinthians, he assumed a confident
   air, and claimed for himself an authority that he would not venture to
   assert in writing to other Churches. For we shall see by and by, that
   he was unjustly loaded with this reproach, too, as though he were
   preparing little nests [43] for himself, with the view of shunning the
   light, or were withdrawing himself in a clandestine way from the rest
   of the Apostles. It appears, then, that expressly for the purpose of
   refuting this falsehood, he places himself in a commanding position,
   from which he may be heard afar off.

   3. Grace be to you and peace For an exposition of this prayer, let my
   readers consult the beginning of my Commentary on the Epistle to the
   Romans (Romans 1:7;) for I do not willingly burden my readers with
   repetitions.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [35] "Le leur et le nostre," ou, "le Seigneur (di-ie) et de eux et de
   nous;" -- "Both theirs and ours," or, "the Lord (I say) both of them
   and of us."

   [36] "Constitue, ordonne, et establi;" -- "Appointed, ordained, and
   established."

   [37] "Et aujour d'huy, qu'est ce qu'entonnent a plene bouche les
   Romanisques, sinon cen gros mots, Ordination de Dieu, La sainte et
   sacree succession depuis le temps mesme des Apostres;" -- "And at the
   present day, what do the Romanists sound forth with open mouth, but
   those grand terms, Ordination from God, -- The holy and sacred
   succession from the very times of the Apostles."

   [38] Institutes, volume 3.

   [39] Apostolos, (an apostle) derived from apostellein, (to send forth,)
   signifies literally a messenger. The term is employed by classical
   writer to denote the commander of an expedition, or a delegate, or
   ambassador. (See Herodotus, v. 38.) In the New Testament it is in
   various instances employed in a general sense to denote a messenger.
   (See Luke 11:49; John 13:16; Philippians 2:25.) In one instance it is
   applied to Christ himself, (Hebrews 3:1.) Most frequently, however, it
   is applied to those extraordinary messengers who were (to use the words
   of Leigh in his Critics Sacra) Christ's "legates a latere," from his
   side. -- Ed

   [40] "Mais (dira quelqu'un;)" -- "But (some one will say.)"

   [41] "Tu te pourras bien entretenir en l'Eglise tellement quellement
   estant mesle parmi les autres;" -- "You may quite well have a standing
   in the Church in some sort of way, being mixed up among others."

   [42] Synedoche, a figure of speech, by which part is taken for the
   whole. -- Ed.

   [43] "Nids et cachettes;" -- "Nests and lurking-holes."
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 1:4-9

   4. I thank my God always on your behalf, for the grace of God which is
   given you by Jesus Christ;

   4. Gratias ago Deo meo semper de vobis propter gratiam Dei, quae data
   vobis est in Christo Jesu.

   5. That in every thing ye are enriched by him, in all utterance, and in
   all knowledge;

   5. Quia in onmibus ditati estis in ipso, in omni sermone, [44] et in
   omni cognitione.

   6. Even as the testimony of Christ was confirmed in you:

   6. Quemadmodum testimonium Christi confirmatum fuit in vobis.

   7. So that ye come behind in no gift; waiting for the coming of our
   Lord Jesus Christ:

   7. Ut nullo in dono destituamini, exspectantes revelationem Domini
   nostri Jesu Christi.

   8. Who shall also confirm you unto the end, that ye may be blameless in
   the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.

   8. Qui etiam confirmabit vos usque in finem inculpatos, in diem Domini
   nostri Jesu Christi.

   9. God is faithful, by whom ye were called unto the fellowship of his
   Son Jesus Christ our Lord.

   9. Fidelis Deus, per quem vocati estis in communionem Filii ipsius Jesu
   Christi Domini nostri.


   4. I give thanks to my God. Having in the salutation secured for
   himself authority from the station assigned him, he now endeavors to
   procure favor for his doctrine, by expressing his affection for them.
   In this way he soothes their minds beforehand, that they may listen
   patiently to his reproofs. [45] He persuades them of his affection for
   them by the following tokens -- his discovering as much joy in the
   benefits bestowed upon them, as if they had been conferred upon
   himself; and his declaring that he entertains a favorable opinion of
   them, and has good hopes of them as to the future. Farther, he
   qualifies his congratulations in such a way as to give them no occasion
   to be puffed up, as he traces up to God all the benefits that they
   possessed, that the entire praise may redound to him, inasmuch as they
   are the fruits of his grace. It is as though he had said -- "I
   congratulate you indeed, but it is in such a way as to ascribe the
   praise to God." His meaning, when he calls God his God, I have
   explained in my Commentary upon the Epistle to the Romans (Romans 1:8.)
   As Paul was not prepared to flatter the Corinthians, so neither has he
   commended them on false grounds. For although all were not worthy of
   such commendations, and though they corrupted many excellent gifts of
   God by ambition, yet the gifts themselves it became him not to despise,
   because they were, in themselves, deserving of commendation. Farther,
   as the gifts of the Spirit are conferred for the edification of all, it
   is with good reason that he enumerates them as gifts common to the
   whole Church. [46] But let us see what he commends in them.

   For the grace, etc. This is a general term, for it comprehends
   blessings of every kind that they had obtained through means of the
   gospel. For the term grace denotes here not the favor of God, but by
   metonymy [47] (metonumikos), the gifts that he bestows upon men
   gratuitously. He immediately proceeds to specify particular instances,
   when he says that they are enriched in all things, and specifies what
   those all things are -- the doctrine and word of God. For in these
   riches it becomes Christians to abound; and they ought also to be
   esteemed by us the more, and regarded by us as so much the more
   valuable, in proportion as they are ordinarily slighted. The phrase in
   ipso (in him) I have preferred to retain, rather than render it per
   ipsum (by him,) because it has in my opinion more expressiveness and
   force. For we are enriched in Christ, inasmuch as we are members of his
   body, and are engrafted into him: nay more, being made one with him, he
   makes us share with him in everything that he has received from the
   Father.

   6. Even as the testimony, etc. Erasmus gives a different rendering, to
   this effect, "that by these things the testimony of Christ was
   confirmed in them;" that is, by knowledge and by the word. The words,
   however, convey another meaning, and if they are not wrested, the
   meaning is easy -- that God has sealed the truth of his gospel among
   the Corinthians, for the purpose of confirming it. Now, this might be
   done in two ways, either by miracles, or by the inward testimony of the
   Holy Spirit. Chrysostom seems to understand it of miracles, but I take
   it in a larger sense; and, first of all, it is certain, that the gospel
   is properly confirmed in our experience by faith, because it is only
   when we receive it by faith that we "set to our seal that God is true"
   (John 3:33.) And though I admit that miracles ought to have weight for
   the confirmation of it, yet we must go higher in search of the origin,
   namely this, that the Spirit of God is the earnest and seal.
   Accordingly, I explain these words in this manner -- that the
   Corinthians excelled in knowledge, inasmuch as God had from the
   beginning given efficacy to his gospel among them, and that not in one
   way merely, but had done so both by the internal influence of the
   Spirit, and by excellence and variety of gifts, by miracles, and by all
   other helps. He calls the gospel the testimony of Christ, or respecting
   Christ, because the entire sum of it tends to discover Christ to us,

   "In whom all the treasures of knowledge are hid" (Colossians 2:3.)

   If any one prefers to take it in an active sense, on the ground that
   Christ is the primary author of the gospel, so that the Apostles were
   nothing but secondary or inferior witnesses, I shall not much oppose
   it. I feel better satisfied, however, with the former exposition. It is
   true that a little afterwards (1 Corinthians 2:1) the testimony of God
   must, beyond all controversy, be taken in an active sense, as a passive
   signification would not be at all suitable. Here, however, the case is
   different, and, what is more, that passage strengthens my view, as he
   immediately subjoins what it is [48] -- to know nothing but Christ. (1
   Corinthians 2:2.)

   7. So that ye come behind in no gift Ustereisthai means to be in want
   of what you would otherwise stand in need of. [49] He means, therefore,
   that the Corinthians abound in all the gifts of God, so as not to be in
   want of anything, as if he had said, "The Lord has not merely honored
   you with the light of the gospel, but has eminently endowed you with
   all those graces that may be of service to the saints for helping them
   forward in the way of salvation." For he gives the name of gifts
   (charismata) to those spiritual graces that are, as it were, means of
   salvation to the saints. But it is objected, on the other hand, that
   the saints are never in such abundance as not to feel in want of graces
   to some extent, so that they must always of necessity be "hungering and
   thirsting" (Matthew 5:6.) For where is the man that does not come far
   short of perfection? I answer, "As they are sufficiently endowed with
   needful gifts, and are never in such destitution but that the Lord
   seasonably relieves their need; Paul on this ground ascribes to them
   such wealth." For the same reason he adds: waiting for the
   manifestation, meaning, that he does not ascribe to them such abundance
   as to leave nothing to be desired; but merely as much as will suffice,
   until they shall have arrived at perfection. The participle waiting I
   understand in this sense, "In the meantime while you are waiting." Thus
   the meaning will be, "So that ye are in want of no gift in the meantime
   while you are waiting for the day of perfected revelation, by which
   Christ our wisdom (1 Corinthians 1:30) will be fully manifested."

   8. Who will also confirm you. The relative here refers not to Christ,
   but to God, though the word God is the remoter antecedent. For the
   Apostle is going on with his congratulation, and as he has told them
   previously what he thought of them, so he now lets them know what hope
   he has of them as to the future, and this partly for the purpose of
   assuring them still farther of his affection for them, and partly that
   he may exhort them by his own example to cherish the same hope. It is
   as if he had said -- Though the expectation of a salvation to come
   keeps you still in suspense, you ought nevertheless to feel assured
   that the Lord will never forsake you, but will on the contrary increase
   what he has begun in you, that when that day comes on which

   "we must all appear before the judgment-seat of Christ,"
   (2 Corinthians 5:10,)

   we may be found there blameless.

   Blameless In his Epistles to the Ephesians and Colossians (Ephesians
   1:4, and Colossians 1:22) he teaches that this is the end of our
   calling -- that we may appear pure and unreproachable in the presence
   of Christ. It is, however, to be observed, that this glorious purity is
   not in the first instance perfected in us; nay, rather, it goes well
   with us if we are every day making progress in penitence, and are being
   purged from the sins (2 Peter 1:9) that expose us to the displeasure of
   God, until at length we put off, along with the mortal body, all the
   offscourings of sin. Of the day of the Lord we shall have occasion to
   speak when we come to the fourth chapter.

   9. God is faithful When the Scripture speaks of God as faithful the
   meaning in many cases is, that in God there is steadfastness and
   evenness of tenor, so that what he begins he prosecutes to the end,
   [50] as Paul himself says elsewhere, that the calling of God is without
   repentance (Romans 11:29.) Hence, in my opinion, the meaning of this
   passage is, that God is steadfast in what he purposes. This being the
   case, he consequently does not make sport as to his calling, but will
   unceasingly take care of his work. [51] From God's past benefits we
   ought always to hope well as to the future. Paul, however, has
   something higher in view, for he argues that the Corinthians cannot be
   cast off, having been once called by the Lord into Christ's fellowship.
   To apprehend fully, however, the force of this argument, let us observe
   first of all, that every one ought to regard his calling as a token of
   his election. Farther, although one cannot judge with the same
   certainty as to another's election, yet we must always in the judgment
   of charity conclude that all that are called are called to salvation; I
   mean efficaciously and fruitfully. Paul, however, directed his
   discourse to those in whom the word of the Lord had taken root, and in
   whom some fruits of it had been produced.

   Should any one object that many who have once received the word
   afterwards fall away, I answer that the Spirit alone is to every one a
   faithful and sure witness of his election, upon which perseverance
   depends. This, however, did not stand in the way of Paul's being
   persuaded, in the judgment of charity, that the calling of the
   Corinthians would prove firm and immovable, as being persons in whom he
   saw the tokens of God's fatherly benevolence. These things, however, do
   not by any means tend to beget carnal security, to divest us of which
   the Scriptures frequently remind us of our weakness, but simply to
   confirm our confidence in the Lord. Now this was needful, in order that
   their minds might not be disheartened on discovering so many faults, as
   he comes afterwards to present before their view. The sum of all this
   may be stated thus, -- that it is the part of Christian candor to hope
   well of all who have entered on the right way of salvation, and are
   still persevering in that course, notwithstanding that they are at the
   same time still beset with really distempers. Every one of us, too,
   from the time of his being illuminated (Hebrews 10:32) by the Spirit of
   God in the knowledge of Christ, ought to conclude with certainty from
   this that he has been adopted by the Lord to an inheritance of eternal
   life. For effectual calling ought to be to believers an evidence of
   divine adoption; yet in the meantime we must all walk with fear and
   trembling (Philippians 2:12.) On this point I shall touch again to some
   extent when we come to the tenth chapter.

   Into the fellowship. Instead of this rendering Erasmus translates it
   into partnership The old interpreter renders it society I have
   preferred, however, to render it fellowship, as bringing out better the
   force of the Greek word koinonias [52] For this is the design of the
   gospel, that Christ may become ours, and that we may be engrafted into
   his body. Now when the Father gives him to us in possession, he also
   communicates himself to us in him; and hence arises a participation in
   every benefit. Paul's argument, then, is this -- "Since you have, by
   means of the gospel which you have received by faith, been called into
   the fellowship of Christ, you have no reason to dread the danger of
   death, [53] having been made partakers of him (Hebrews 3:14) who rose a
   conqueror over death." In fine, when the Christian looks to himself he
   finds only occasion for trembling, or rather for despair; but having
   been called into the fellowship of Christ, he ought, in so far as
   assurance of salvation is concerned, to think of himself no otherwise
   than as a member of Christ, so as to reckon all Christ's benefits his
   own. Thus he will obtain an unwavering hope of final perseverance, (as
   it is called,) if he reckons himself a member of him who is beyond all
   hazard of falling away.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [44] "Parole," ou "eloquence;" -- "Utterance," or "eloquence."

   [45] The same view of Paul's design here is given by Theodoret: "Mellon
   kategorein protherapeuei ten akoen hoste dekten genesthai ten
   iatreian;" -- "As he is about to censure them, he soothes beforehand
   the organ of hearing, that the remedy to be applied may be the more
   favorably received." -- Ed

   [46] "Que chacun ha en son endroit;" -- "Which every one has
   severally."

   [47] A figure of speech, by which one term is put for another -- the
   cause for the effect, the effect for the cause, etc. -- Ed.

   [48] "Quel est ce tesmoignage;" -- "What this testimony is."

   [49] The word is used in this sense in the following passages: Luke
   15:14; 2 Corinthians 11:9; Philippians 4:12; and Hebrews 11:37. The
   proper meaning is -- to come too late for a thing, and so miss of it.
   Xenophon uses it in this sense. Abrokomas husterese tos maches: --
   "Abrocomas came too late for the battle." The word occurs in the same
   sense in Hebews 4:1 and Hebews 12:15. -- Ed

   [50] Calvin probably refers to the following (among other) passagess:
   -- 1 Thessalonians 5:24; 2 Thessalonians 3:3; Hebrews 10:23.

   [51] "La vocation done qu'il fait d'un chacun des siens, n'est point un
   jeu, et en les appellant il ne se mocque point, ainsi il entretiendra
   et pour suyura son ceuvre perpetuellement;" -- "The calling, therefore,
   that he makes of each of his own, is not mere play; and in calling them
   he does not make sport, but will unceasingly maintain and prosecute his
   work."

   [52] Calvin in his Institutes, (volume 2,) after speaking of Christ's
   being represented by Paul as "offered to us in the gospel with all the
   abundance of heavenly blessings, with all his merits, all his
   righteousness, wisdom, and grace, without exception," remarks -- "And
   what is meant by the fellowship koinonia of Christ, which, according to
   the same apostle (1 Corinthians 1:9) is offered to us in the gospel,
   all believers know." -- Ed

   [53] "La mort et perdition;" -- "Death and perdition."
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 1:10-13

   10. Now I beseech you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
   that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among
   you; but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind and in
   the same judgment.

   10. Observo autem vos, fratres, per nomen Domini nostri Jesu Christi,
   ut idem loquamini omnes, et non sint inter vos dissidia: sed apte
   cohaereatis in una mente et in una sententia. [54]

   11. For it hath been declared unto me of you, my brethren, by them
   which are of the house of Chloe, that there are contentions among you.

   11. Significatum enim mihi de vobis fuit, fratres mei, ab iis qui sunt
   Chloes, quod contentiones sint inter vos.

   12. Now this I say, that every one of you saith, I am of Paul; and I of
   Apollos; and I of Cephas; and I of Christ.

   12. Dico autem illud, [55] quod unusquisque vestrum dicat, Ego quidem
   sum Pauli, ego autem Apollo, ego autem Cephae:, ego autem Christi.

   13. Is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you? or were ye baptized
   in the name of Paul?

   13. Divisusne est Christus? numquid pro vobis crucifixus est Paulus?
   aut vos in nomen Pauli baptizati estis?


   10. Now I beseech you, brethren Hitherto he has handled the Corinthians
   mildly, because he knew that they were much too sensitive. Now,
   however, after preparing their minds for receiving correction, acting
   the part of a good and skillful surgeon, who soothes the wound when
   about to apply a painful remedy, he begins to handle them with more
   severity. Even here, however, as we shall still farther see, he uses
   great moderation. The sum is this: "It is my hope that the Lord has not
   in vain conferred upon you so many gifts, so as not to have it in view
   to bring you to salvation, but you ought at the same time to take heed
   lest graces so distinguished be polluted by your vices. See, then, that
   you be agreed among yourselves; and it is not without good reason that
   I call for agreement among yourselves, for I have been informed that
   you are in a state of disagreement, amounting even to hostility, and
   that there are parties and contentions raging among you, by which true
   unity of faith is torn asunder." As, however, they might not perhaps be
   sufficiently aroused by mere exhortation, he uses earnest entreaty, for
   he adjures them, by the name of Christ, that, as they loved him, they
   should aim at promoting harmony.

   That ye all speak the same thing In exhorting them to harmony, he
   employs three different forms of expression: for, in the first place,
   he requires such agreement among them that all shall have one voice;
   secondly, he takes away the evil by which unity is broken and torn
   asunder; and, thirdly, he unfolds the nature of true harmony, which is,
   that they be agreed among themselves in mind and will. What he has
   placed second is first in order, -- that we beware of strifes. For from
   this a second thing will naturally follow, -- that we be in harmony;
   and then at length a third thing will follow, which is here mentioned
   first, -- that we all speak, as it were, with one mouth; a thing
   exceedingly desirable as a fruit of Christian harmony. Let us then
   observe, that nothing is more inconsistent on the part of Christians
   than to be at variance among themselves, for it is the main article of
   our religion that we be in harmony among ourselves; and farther, on
   such agreement the safety of the Church rests and is dependent.

   But let us see what he requires as to Christian unity. If any one is
   desirous of nice distinctions -- he would have them first of all joined
   together in one mind; secondly, in one judgment; and, thirdly, he would
   have them declare in words that agreement. As, however, my rendering
   differs somewhat from that of Erasmus, I would, in passing, call my
   readers to observe, that Paul here makes use of a participle, which
   denotes things that are fitly and suitably joined together [56] For the
   verb katartizesthai itself (from which the participle katertismenos
   comes) properly signifies, to be fitted and adjusted, just as the
   members of the human body are connected together by a most admirable
   symmetry. [57]

   For sententia (judgment) Paul has gnomen: but I understand it here as
   denoting the will, so that there is a complete division of the soul,
   and the first clause refers to faith, the second to love. Then only
   will there be Christian unity among us, when there is not merely a good
   agreement as to doctrine, but we are also in harmony in our affections
   and dispositions, and are thus in all respects of one mind. Thus Luke
   bears witness to believers in the primitive Church, (Acts 2:46,) that
   they had "one heart and one soul." And without doubt this will be found
   wherever the Spirit of Christ reigns. When, however, he exhorts them to
   speak the same thing, he intimates still more fully from the effect,
   how complete the agreement ought to be -- so that no diversity may
   appear even in words. It is difficult, indeed, of attainment, but still
   it is necessary among Christians, from whom there is required not
   merely one faith, but also one confession.

   11. It has been declared. As general observations have usually little
   effect, he intimates, that what he had said was more particularly
   applicable to them. The application, therefore, is designed with the
   view of leading the Corinthians to perceive, that it was not without
   good reason that Paul had made mention of harmony. For he shows that
   they had not merely turned aside from a holy unity, [58] but had even
   fallen into contentions, which are worse [59] than jarrings of
   sentiment. And that he may not be charged with believing too readily
   what was said, [60] as though he lightly lent his ear to false
   accusations, he speaks with commendation of his informants, who must
   have been in the highest esteem, as he did not hesitate to adduce them
   as competent witnesses against an entire Church. It is not indeed
   altogether certain, whether Chloe is the name of a place or of a woman,
   but to me it appears more probable that it is the name of a woman. [61]
   I am of opinion, therefore, that it was a well-regulated household that
   acquainted Paul with the distempered condition of the Corinthian
   Church, being desirous that it might be remedied by him. The idea
   entertained by many, in accordance with Chrysostom's view, that he
   refrained from mentioning names, lest he should bring odium upon them,
   appears to me to be absurd. For he does not say that some of the
   household had reported this to him, but, on the contrary, makes mention
   of them all, and there is no doubt that they would willingly have
   allowed their names to be made use of. Farther, that he might not
   exasperate their minds by undue severity, he has modified the reproof
   by an engaging form of address; not as though he would make light of
   the distemper, but with the view of bringing them to a more teachable
   spirit, for perceiving the severity of the malady.

   12. I say then, etc. Some think there is here an instance of mimesis,
   imitation, as if Paul were here repeating their expressions. Now,
   although the manuscripts differ as to the particle hoti, I am of
   opinion that it is the conjunction (because) rather than the relative
   (which), so that there is simply an explanation of the preceding
   statement in this sense. "My reason for saying that there are
   contentions among you is, because every one of you glories in the name
   of some individual." It will, however, be objected, that in these words
   there is no appearance as yet of contention. My answer is, that where
   there are jarrings in religion, it cannot but be that men's minds will
   soon afterwards burst forth in open strife. For as nothing is more
   effectual for uniting us, and there is nothing that tends more to draw
   our minds together, and keep them in a state of peace, than agreement
   in religion, so, on the other hand, if any disagreement has arisen as
   to matters of this nature, the effect necessarily is, that men's minds
   are straightway stirred up for combat, and in no other department are
   there more fierce contendings. [62] Hence it is with good reason that
   Paul brings it forward as a sufficient evidence of contention, that the
   Corinthians were infested with sects and parties.

   I am of Paul He makes mention here of Christ's faithful servants --
   Apollos, who had been his successor at Corinth, and Peter himself too,
   and then adds himself to their number, that he may appear to plead not
   so much his own cause as that of Christ. In any other point of view it
   is not likely that there were any parties that espoused the separate
   interests of ministers joined together by a sacred agreement. [63] He
   has, however, as he afterwards mentions, transferred to himself and
   Apollos what was applicable to others; and this he has done, in order
   that they might more candidly consider the thing itself, viewing it
   apart from respect of persons. It will, however, be replied, that he
   makes mention here even of those who professed that they were of Christ
   Was this, too, worthy of blame? I answer, that in this way he shows
   more fully what unseemly consequences result from those depraved
   affections, when we give ourselves up to men, as in that case Christ
   must be acknowledged merely in part, and the pious have no alternative
   left them, but to separate themselves from others, if they would not
   renounce Christ.

   As, however, this passage is wrested in various ways, we must endeavor
   to ascertain more minutely what Paul intends here. His object is, to
   maintain Christ's exclusive authority in the Church, so that we may all
   exercise dependence upon him, that he alone may be recognized among us
   as Lord and Master, and that the name of no individual be set in
   opposition to his. Those, therefore, that draw away disciples after
   them (Acts 20:30,) with the view of splitting the Church into parties,
   he condemns as most destructive enemies of our faith. Thus then he does
   not, suffer men to have such pre-eminence in the Church as to usurp
   Christ's supremacy. He does not allow them to be held in such honor as
   to derogate even in the slightest degree from Christ's dignity. There
   is, it is true, a certain degree of honor that is due to Christ's
   ministers, and they are also themselves masters in their own place, but
   this exception must always be kept in view, that Christ must have
   without any infringement what belongs to him -- that he shall
   nevertheless be the sole Master, and looked upon as such. Hence the aim
   of good ministers is this, that they may all in common serve Christ,
   and claim for him exclusively power, authority, and glory -- fight
   under his banner -- obey him alone, and bring others in subjection to
   his sway. If any one is influenced by ambition, that man gathers
   disciples, not to Christ, but to himself. This then is the fountain of
   all evils -- this the most hurtful of all plagues -- this the deadly
   poison of all Churches, when ministers seek their own interests rather
   than those of Christ. In short, the unity of the Church consists more
   especially in this one thing -- that we all depend upon Christ alone,
   and that men thus occupy an inferior place, so as not to detract in any
   degree from his pre-eminence.

   13. Is Christ divided? This intolerable evil was consequent upon the
   divisions that prevailed among the Corinthians: for Christ alone must
   reign in the Church. And as the object of the gospel is, that we be
   reconciled to God through him, it is necessary, in the first place,
   that we should all be bound together in him. As, however, only a very
   few of the Corinthians, who were in a sounder condition than the
   others, [64] retained Christ as their Master, (while all made it their
   boast that they were Christians,) Christ was by this means torn
   asunder. For we must be one body, if we would be kept together under
   him as our head. If, on the other hand, we are split asunder into
   different bodies, we start aside from him also. Hence to glory in his
   name amidst strifes and parties is to tear him in pieces: which indeed
   is impossible, for never will he depart from unity and concord, because
   "He cannot deny himself" (2 Timothy 2:13.) Paul, therefore, by setting
   before them this absurdity, designs to lead the Corinthians to perceive
   that they are estranged from Christ, inasmuch as they are divided, for
   then only does he reign in us, when we have him as the bond of an
   inviolably sacred unity.

   Was Paul crucified for you? By two powerful considerations, he shows
   how base a thing [65] it is to rob Christ of the honor of being the
   sole Head of the Church -- the sole Teacher -- the sole Master; or to
   draw away from him any part of that honor, with the view of
   transferring it to men. The first is, that we have been redeemed by
   Christ on this footing, that we are not our own masters. This very
   argument Paul makes use of in his Epistle to the Romans (Romans 14:9,)
   when he says,

   "For this end Christ died and rose again, that he might be Lord both of
   the living and the dead."

   To him, therefore, let us live and die, because we are always his. Also
   in this same Epistle (1 Corinthians 7:23,)

   "Ye are bought with a price: be not ye the servants of men."

   As the Corinthians, therefore, had been purchased with the blood of
   Christ, they in a manner renounced the benefit of redemption, when they
   attached themselves to other leaders. Here is a doctrine that is
   deserving of special notice -- that we are not at liberty to put
   ourselves under bondage to men, [66] because we are the Lord's
   heritage. Here, therefore, he accuses the Corinthians of the basest
   ingratitude, in estranging themselves from that Leader, by whose blood
   they had been redeemed, however they might have done so unwittingly.

   Farther, this passage militates against the wicked contrivance of
   Papists, by which they attempt to bolster up their system of
   indulgences. For it is from the blood of Christ and the martyrs [67]
   that they make up that imaginary treasure of the Church, which they
   tell us is dealt out by means of indulgences. Thus they pretend that
   the martyrs by their death merited something for us in the sight of
   God, that we may seek help from this source for obtaining the pardon of
   our sins. They will deny, indeed, that they are on that account our
   redeemers; but nothing is more manifest than that the one thing follows
   from the other. The question is as to the reconciling of sinners to
   God; the question is as to the obtaining of forgiveness; the question
   is as to the appeasing of the Lord's anger; the question is as to
   redemption from our iniquities. This they boast is accomplished partly
   by the blood of Christ, and partly by that of the martyrs. They make,
   therefore, the martyrs partners with Christ in procuring our salvation.
   Here, however, Paul in strong terms denies that any one but Christ has
   been crucified for us. The martyrs, it is true, died for our benefit,
   but (as Leo [68] observes) it was to furnish an example of
   perseverance, not to procure for us the gift of righteousness.

   Or were ye baptized in the name of Paul? Here we have a second
   argument, which is taken from the profession of baptism; for we enlist
   ourselves under the banners of him in whose name we are baptized. We
   are, accordingly, bound [69] to Christ, in whose name our baptism is
   celebrated. Hence it follows that the Corinthians are chargeable with
   perfidy and apostasy, if they place themselves under subjection to men.
   Observe here that the nature of baptism resembles a contract [70] of
   mutual obligation; for as the Lord by that symbol receives us into his
   household, and introduces us among his people, so we pledge our
   fidelity to him, that we will never afterwards have any other spiritual
   Lord. Hence as it is on God's part a covenant of grace that he
   contracts with us, in which he promises forgiveness of sins and a new
   life, so on our part it is an oath of spiritual warfare, in which we
   promise perpetual subjection to him. The former department Paul does
   not here touch upon, because the subject did not admit of it; but in
   treating of baptism it ought not to be omitted. Nor does Paul charge
   the Corinthians with apostasy simply on the ground of their forsaking
   Christ and betaking themselves to men; but he declares that if they do
   not adhere to Christ alone -- that very thing would make them
   covenant-breakers.

   It is asked, what it is to be baptized in the name of Christ? I answer
   that by this expression it is not simply intimated that baptism is
   founded on the authority of Christ, but depends also on his influence,
   and does in a manner consist in it; and, in fine, that the whole effect
   of it depends on this -- that the name of Christ is therein invoked. It
   is asked farther, why it is that Paul says that the Corinthians were
   baptized in the name of Christ, while Christ himself commanded (Matthew
   28:19) the Apostles to baptize in the name of the Father, and of the
   Son, and of the Holy Spirit. I answer, that in baptism the first thing
   to be considered is, that God the Father, by planting us in his Church
   in unmerited goodness, receives us by adoption into the number of his
   sons. Secondly, as we cannot have any connection with him except by
   means of reconciliation, we have need of Christ to restore us to the
   Father's favor by his blood. Thirdly, as we are by baptism consecrated
   to God, we need also the interposition of the Holy Spirit, whose office
   it is to make us new creatures. Nay farther, our being washed in the
   blood of Christ is peculiarly his work; but as we do not obtain the
   mercy of the Father, or the grace of the Spirit, otherwise than through
   Christ alone, it is on good grounds that we speak of him as the
   peculiar object in view in baptism, and more particularly inscribe his
   name upon baptism. At the same time this does not by any means exclude
   the name of the Father and of the Spirit; for when we wish to sum up in
   short compass the efficacy of baptism, we make mention of Christ alone;
   but when we are disposed to speak with greater minuteness, the name of
   the Father and that of the Spirit require to be expressly introduced.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [54] "Et en une mesme volonte," ou "et mesme avis;" -- "And in the same
   disposition," or "and the same judgement."

   [55] "Et ie de ceci," ou "Or ce que ie di c'est qu'un chacun;" -- "And
   this I say," or "Now what I say is this, that every one."

   [56] "Et assembles l'une h l'autre;" -- "And associated with each
   other."

   [57] The verb katartizo properly signifies, to repair, or refit, or
   restore to its original condition what has been disarranged or broken;
   and in this sense it is applied to the repairing of nets, ships, walls,
   etc. (See Matthew 4:21; Mark 1:19.) We might with perfect propriety
   understand the Apostle as alluding here to the repairing of a ship that
   has been broken or damaged, and as intimating that a Church, when
   shattered by divisions, is (so to speak) not sea-worthy, and must be
   carefully repaired, before she can be fit for purposes of commerce, by
   conveying to the nations of the earth the "true riches." The allusion,
   however, most probably is, as Calvin thinks, to the members of the
   human body, which are so admirably adjusted to each other. It deserves
   to be noticed, that Paul makes use of a derivative from the same verb
   (katartisis) in 2 Corinthians 13:9, on which Beza observes, "that the
   Apostle's meaning is, that whereas the members of the Church were all
   (as it were) dislocated and out of joint, they should now again be
   joined together in love, and they should endeavor to make perfect what
   was amiss amongst them either in faith or manners." -- Ed

   [58] "La sancte union qui doit estre entre les Chrestiens;" -- "That
   holy unity which ought to be among Christians."

   [59] "Bien plus dangereuses;" -- "Much more dangerous."

   [60] It is remarked by Beza that the verb here employed, deloo, (to
   declare,)has a stronger signification than semaino (to intimate,) just
   as there is a difference of meaning between the Latin words declarare
   (to declare) and significare (to intimate,) an example of which is
   furnished in a letter of Cicero to Lucretius, "tibi non significandum
   solum, sed etiam declarandum arbitror, nihil mihi esse potuisse tuis
   literis gratius;" "I think it ought to be not merely intimated to you
   but declared, that nothing could be more agreeable to me than your
   letters." The emphatic word edelothn (it has been declared,) appears to
   have been made use of by the Apostle to convey more fully to the mind
   of the Corhlthians, that he had not hastily given heed to a mere
   report. -- Ed

   [61] Some have thought that by tos Chloes,(those of Chloe,) the Apostle
   means persons who were in a flourishing condition in religion; from
   chloe, green herbage, (Herodotus, 4:34, Euripides, Hipp. 1124.) One
   writer supposes Paul to mean seniores, (elders,) deriving the word
   chloe from klch, old age. These conjectures, however, are manifestly
   more ingenious than solid. It is certain that the name Chlon (Chloe,)
   was frequent among the Greeks as the name of a female. It is most
   natural to understand by ton Chlons those of Chloe, as equivalent to
   ton Chlons soikeios -- those of the household of Chloe. -- Ed

   [62] "Et n'y a en chose quelconque debars si grans ni tant a craindre
   que sent ceux-la;" -- "And in no department are there disputes so
   great, or so much to be dreaded as those:"

   [63] "Autrement veu que ces trois estoyent d'un sainct accord ensemble
   en leur ministere, il n'est point vray-semblable, qu'il y eust aucunes
   partialitez entre les Corinthiens pour se glorifier en l'un plustost
   qu'en l'autre;" -- "Otherwise, seeing that those three were united in
   their ministry by a sacred agreement, it is not likely that there were
   any parties among the Corinthians that were prepared to glory in one of
   them rather than in another."

   [64] "Mieux avisez que les autres;" -- "Better advised than the
   others."

   [65] "Combien c'est vne chose insupportable;" -- "How insufferable a
   thing it is."

   [66] "Addicere nos hominibus in servitutem" -- "de nous assuiettir aux
   hommes en seruitude;" -- "To give ourselves up to men, so as to be in
   bondage to them." Calvin very probably had in his eye the celebrated
   sentiment of Horace, (Epistle 1 50:14,) "Nullius addictus jurare in
   verba magistri;" -- "Bound to swear allegiance to no master," while
   enforcing the sentiment by a powerful consideration, to which the
   heathen poet was an entire stranger. -- Ed.

   [67] "Du sang de Christ, et des martyrs tous ensemble;" -- "From the
   blood of Christ, and of all the martyrs together."

   [68] Leo, ad Palaestinos, Epistle 81. The passage alluded to above is
   quoted at large in the Institutes. (Volume 2.) "Although the death of
   many saints was precious in the sight of the Lord, (Psalm 116:15,) yet
   no innocent man's slaughter was the propitiation of the world. The just
   received crowns, did not give them; and the fortitude of believers
   produced examples of patience, not gifts of righteousness; for their
   deaths were for themselves; and none by his final end paid the debt of
   another, except Christ our Lord, in whom alone all are crucified, all
   dead, buried, and raised up." Leo, from whose writings this admirable
   passage is extracted, was a Roman bishop, who flourished in the fifth
   century, and was one of the most distinguished men of his age. He was a
   most zealous defender of the doctrines of grace, in opposition to
   Pelagianism and other heresies. -- Ed.

   [69] "Obligez par serment;" -- "Bound by oath."

   [70] "Syngrapha (the term employed by Calvin) was a contract or bond,
   formally entered into between two parties, signed and sealed by both,
   and a copy given to each." Cic. Verr. 1:36. Dio. 48:37. It is derived
   from a Greek term sungraphe (a legal instrument or obligation.)
   Herodotus 1:48; and Demosthenes 268:13. P. steph. -- Ed
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 1:14-20

   14. I thank God that I baptized none of you, but Crispus and Gaius;

   14. Gratias ago Deo meo, quod neminem baptizaverim vestrum, nisi
   Crispurn et Gaium:

   15. Lest any should say that I had baptized in mine own name.

   15. Ne quis dieat, quod in meum nomen baptizaverim.

   16. And I baptized also the household of Stephanas: besides, I know not
   whether I baptized any other.

   16. Baptizavi autem et Stephanae familiam; praeteterea nescio, num quem
   alium baptizaverim.

   17. For Christ sent me not, to baptize, but to preach the gospel: not
   with wisdom of words, lest the cross of Christ should be made of none
   effect.

   17. Non enim misit me Christus ut baptizarem, sed ut evangelizarem: non
   in sapientia sermonis, ne inanis reddatur crux Christi.

   18. For the preaching of the cross is to them that perish foolishness;
   but unto us which are saved it is the power of God.

   18. Nam sermo erucis iis, qui pereunt, stultitia est; at nobis qui
   salutem consequimur, potentia Dei est.

   19. For it is written, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will
   bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent.

   19. Scriptum est enim; (Ies. 29:14): perdam sapientiam sapientum, et
   intelligentiam intelligentum auferam e medio.

   20. Where is the wise? where is the scribe? where is the disputer of
   this world? hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this world?

   20. Ubi sapiens? ubi scriba? ubi disputator hujus saeculi? nonne
   infatuavit Deus sapientiam mundi hujus?


   14. I thank my God. In these words he reproves very sharply the
   perversity of the Corinthians, which made it necessary for him to
   avoid, in a manner, a thing so sacred and honorable as that of the
   administration of baptism. Paul, indeed, would have acted with
   propriety, and in accordance with the nature of his office, though he
   had baptized ever so many. He rejoices, however, that it had happened
   otherwise, and acknowledges it as having been so ordered, in the
   providence of God, that they might not take occasion from that to glory
   in him, or that he might not bear any resemblance to those ambitious
   men who endeavored in this way to catch followers. But what if he had
   baptized many? There would have been no harm in it, but (as I have
   said) there is couched under this a heavy reproach against the
   Corinthians and their false apostles, inasmuch as a servant of the Lord
   found occasion to rejoice that he had refrained from a work, otherwise
   good and commendable, lest it should become an occasion of harm to
   them.

   17. For Christ sent me not. He anticipates an objection that might,
   perhaps, be brought against him -- that he had not discharged his duty,
   inasmuch as Christ commands his Apostles to baptize as well as teach.
   Accordingly he replies, that this was not the principal department of
   his office, for the duty of teaching had been principally enjoined upon
   him as that to which he should apply himself. For when Christ says to
   the Apostles, (Matthew 28:19, Mark 16:15,) Go, preach and baptize, he
   connects baptism with teaching simply as an addition or appendage, so
   that teaching always holds the first place.

   Two things, however, must be noticed here. The first is, that the
   Apostle does not here absolutely deny that he had a command to baptize,
   for this is applicable to all the Apostles: Go and baptize; and he
   would have acted rashly in baptizing even one, had he not been
   furnished with authority, but simply points out what was the chief
   thing in his calling. The second thing is, that he does not by any
   means detract here, as some think, from the dignity or utility of the
   sacrament. For the question here is, not as to the efficacy of baptism,
   and Paul does not institute this comparison with the view of detracting
   in any degree from that; but because it was given to few to teach,
   while many could baptize; and farther, as many could be taught at the
   same time, while baptism could only be administered to individuals
   successively, one by one, Paul, who excelled in the gift of teaching,
   applied himself to the work that was more especially needful for him,
   and left to others what they could more conveniently accomplish. Nay
   farther, if the reader considers minutely all the circumstances of the
   case, he will see that there is irony [71] tacitly conveyed here,
   dexterously contrived for making those feel acutely, who, under color
   of administering a ceremony, endeavor to catch a little glory at the
   expense of another's labor. Paul's labors in building up that Church
   had been incredible. There had come after him certain effeminate
   masters, who had drawn over followers to their party by the sprinkling
   of water; [72] Paul, then, giving up to them the title of honor,
   declares himself contented with having had the burden. [73]

   Not with wisdom of words There is here an instance of anticipation, by
   which a twofold objection is refuted. For these pretended teachers
   might reply that it was ludicrous to hear Paul, who was not endowed
   with eloquence, making it his boast that the department of teaching had
   been assigned to him. Hence he says, by way of concession, that he had
   not been formed to be an orator, [74] to set himself off by elegance of
   speech: but a minister of the Spirit, that he might, by plain and
   homely speech, bring to nothing the wisdom of the world. Now, lest any
   one should object that he hunted after glory by his preaching, as much
   as others did by baptism, he briefly replies, that as the method of
   teaching that he pursued was the farthest removed from show, and
   breathed nothing of ambition, it could give no ground of suspicion on
   that head. Hence, too, if I mistake not, it may readily be inferred
   what was the chief ground of the controversy that Paul had with the
   wicked and unfaithful ministers of the Corinthians. It was that, being
   puffed up with ambition, that they might secure for themselves the
   admiration of the people, they recommended themselves to them by a show
   of words and mask of human wisdom.

   From this main evil two others necessarily followed -- that by these
   disguises (so to speak) the simplicity of the gospel was disfigured,
   and Christ was, as it were, clothed in a new and foreign garb, so that
   the pure and unadulterated knowledge of him was not to be found.
   Farther, as men's minds were turned aside to neatness and elegance of
   expression, to ingenious speculations, and to an empty show of superior
   sublimity of doctrine, the efficacy of the Spirit vanished, and nothing
   remained but the dead letter. The majesty of God, as it shines forth in
   the gospel, was not to be seen, but mere disguise and useless show.
   Paul, accordingly, with the view of exposing these corruptions of the
   gospel, makes a transition here to the manner of his preaching. This he
   declares to be right and proper, while at the same time it was
   diametrically opposed to the ambitious ostentation of those men. [75]
   It is as though he had said -- "I am well aware how much your
   fastidious teachers delight themselves in their high-sounding phrases.
   As for myself, I do not simply confess that my preaching has been
   conducted in a rude, coarse, and unpolished style, but I even glory in
   it. For it was right that it should be so, and this was the method that
   was divinely prescribed to me." By the wisdom of words, he does not
   mean logodaidalia, [76] which is mere empty talk, but true eloquence,
   which consists in skillful contrivance of subjects, ingenious
   arrangement, and elegance of expression. He declares that he had
   nothing of this: nay more, that it was neither suitable to his
   preaching nor advantageous.

   Lest the cross of Christ should be made of none effect As he had so
   often previously presented the name of Christ in contrast with the
   arrogant wisdom of the flesh, so now, with the view of bringing down
   thereby all its pride and loftiness, he brings forward to view the
   cross of Christ. For all the wisdom of believers is comprehended in the
   cross of Christ, and what more contemptible than a cross? Whoever,
   therefore, would desire to be truly wise in God's account, must of
   necessity stoop to this abasement of the cross, and this will not be
   accomplished otherwise than by his first of all renouncing his own
   judgment and all the wisdom of the world. Paul, however, shows here not
   merely what sort of persons Christ's disciples ought to be, and what
   path of learning they ought to pursue, but also what is the method of
   teaching in Christ's school. "The cross of Christ (says he) would have
   been made of none effect, if my preaching had been adorned with
   eloquence and show." The cross of Christ he has put here for the
   benefit of redemption, which must be sought from Christ crucified. Now
   the doctrine of the gospel which calls us to this, should savor of the
   nature of the Cross, so as to be despised and contemptible, rather than
   glorious, in the eyes of the world. The meaning, therefore, is, that if
   Paul had made use of philosophical acuteness and studied address in the
   presence of the Corinthians, the efficacy of the cross of Christ, in
   which the salvation of men consists, would have been buried, because it
   cannot come to us in that way.

   Here two questions are proposed: first, whether Paul here condemns in
   every respect the wisdom of words, as opposed to Christ; and secondly,
   whether he means that eloquence and the doctrine of the gospel are
   invariably opposed, so they cannot agree together, and that the
   preaching of the gospel is vitiated, if the slightest tincture of
   eloquence [77] is made use of for adorning it. To the first of these I
   answer -- that it were quite unreasonable to suppose, that Paul would
   utterly condemn those arts which, it is manifest, are excellent gifts
   of God, and which serve as instruments, as it were, to assist men in
   the accomplishment of important purposes. As for those arts, then, that
   have nothing of superstition, but contain solid learning, [78] and are
   founded on just principles, as they are useful and suited to the common
   transactions of human life, so there can be no doubt that they have
   come forth from the Holy Spirit; and the advantage which is derived and
   experienced from them, ought to be ascribed exclusively to God. What
   Paul says here, therefore, ought not to be taken as throwing any
   disparagement upon the arts, as if they were unfavorable to piety.

   The second question is somewhat more difficult, for he says, that the
   cross of Christ is made of none effect if there be any admixture of the
   wisdom of words I answer, that we must consider who they are that Paul
   here addresses. The ears of the Corinthians were tickled with a silly
   fondness for high sounding style. [79] Hence they needed more than
   others to be brought back to the abasement of the cross, that they
   might learn to embrace Christ as he is, unadorned, and the gospel in
   its simplicity, without any false ornament. I acknowledge, at the same
   time, that this sentiment in some respects holds invariably, that the
   cross of Christ is made of none effect, not merely by the wisdom of the
   world, but also by elegance of address. For the preaching of Christ
   crucified is simple and unadorned, and hence it ought not to be
   obscured by false ornaments of speech. It is the prerogative of the
   gospel to bring down the wisdom of the world in such a way that,
   stripped of our own understanding, we show ourselves to be simply
   docile, and do not think or even desire to know anything, but what the
   Lord himself teaches. As to the wisdom of the flesh, we shall have
   occasion to consider more at large ere long, in what respects it is
   opposed to Christ. As to eloquence, I shall advert to it here in a few
   words, in so far as the passage calls for.

   We see that God from the beginning ordered matters so, that, the gospel
   should be administered in simplicity, without any aid from eloquence.
   Could not he who fashions the tongues of men for eloquence, be himself
   eloquent if he chose to be so? While he could be so, he did not choose
   to be so. Why it was that he did not choose this, I find two reasons
   more particularly. The first is, that in a plain and unpolished manner
   of address, the majesty of the truth might shine forth more
   conspicuously, and the simple efficacy of his Spirit, without external
   aids, might make its way into the hearts of men. The second is, that he
   might more effectually try our obedience and docility, and train us at
   the same time to true humility. For the Lord admits none into his
   school but little children. [80] Hence those alone are capable of
   heavenly wisdom who, contenting themselves with the preaching of the
   cross, however contemptible it may be in appearance, feel no desire
   whatever to have Christ under a mask. Hence the doctrine of the gospel
   required to be regulated with this view, that believers should be drawn
   off from all pride and haughtiness.

   But what if any one should at the present day, by discoursing with some
   degree of elegance, adorn the doctrine of the gospel by eloquence?
   Would he deserve to be on that account rejected, as though he either
   polluted it or obscured Christ's glory. I answer in the first place,
   that eloquence is not at all at variance with the simplicity of the
   gospel, when it does not merely not disdain to give way to it, and be
   in subjection to it, but also yields service to it, as a handmaid to
   her mistress. For as Augustine says, "He who gave Peter a fisherman,
   gave also Cyprian an orator." By this he means, that both are from God,
   notwithstanding that the one, who is much the superior of the other as
   to dignity, is utterly devoid of gracefulness of speech; while the
   other, who sits at his feet, is distinguished by the fame of his
   eloquence. That eloquence, therefore, is neither to be condemned nor
   despised, which has no tendency to lead Christians to be taken up with
   an outward glitter of words, or intoxicate them with empty delight, or
   tickle their ears with its tinkling sound, or cover over the cross of
   Christ with its empty show as with a veil; [81] but, on the contrary,
   tends to call us back to the native simplicity of the gospel, tends to
   exalt the simple preaching of the cross by voluntarily abasing itself,
   and, in fine, acts the part of a herald [82] to procure a hearing for
   those fishermen and illiterate persons, who have nothing to recommend
   them but the energy of the Spirit.

   I answer secondly, that the Spirit of God, also, has an eloquence of
   his own, but of such a nature as to shine forth with a native luster
   peculiar to itself, or rather (as they say) intrinsic, more than with
   any adventitious ornaments. Such is the eloquence that the Prophets
   have, more particularly Isaiah, David, and Solomon. Moses, too, has a
   sprinkling of it. Nay farther, even in the writings of the Apostles,
   though they are more unpolished, there are notwithstanding some sparks
   of it occasionally emitted. Hence the eloquence that is suited to the
   Spirit of God is of such a nature that it does not swell with empty
   show, or spend itself in empty sound, but is solid and efficacious, and
   has more of substance than elegance.

   18. For the preaching of the cross, etc. In this first clause a
   concession is made. For as it might very readily be objected, that the
   gospel is commonly held in contempt, if it be presented in so bare and
   abject a form, Paul of his own accord concedes this, but when he adds,
   that it is so in the estimation of them that perish, he intimates that
   no regard must be paid to their judgment. For who would choose to
   despise the gospel at the expense of perishing? This statement,
   therefore, must be understood in this way: "However the preaching of
   the cross, as having nothing of human wisdom to recommend it to esteem,
   is reckoned foolishness by them that perish; in our view,
   notwithstanding, the wisdom of God clearly shines forth in it." He
   indirectly reproves, however, the perverted judgment of the
   Corinthians, who, while they were, through seduction of words, too
   easily allured by ambitious teachers, regarded with disdain an Apostle
   who was endowed with the power of God for their salvation, and that
   simply because he devoted himself to the preaching of Christ. In what
   way the preaching of the cross is the power of God unto salvation, we
   have explained in commenting upon Romans 1:16

   19. For it is written, etc. He shows still farther, from the testimony
   of Isaiah, how unreasonable a thing it is that the truth of the gospel
   should be regarded with prejudice on the ground that the wise of this
   world hold it in contempt, not to say derision. For it is evident from
   the words of the Prophet, that their opinion is regarded as nothing in
   the account of God. The passage is taken from Isaiah 29:14, where the
   Lord threatens that he will avenge himself upon the hypocrisy of the
   people by this kind of punishment, that wisdom will perish from the
   wise, etc. Now the application of this to the subject in hand is this:
   "It is nothing new or unusual for men to form utterly absurd judgments,
   who appear in other respects to be distinguished for wisdom. For in
   this manner the Lord has been wont to punish the arrogance of those
   who, depending on their own judgment, think to be leaders to themselves
   and others. In this manner did He, among the Israelitish people of old,
   destroy the wisdom of those who were the leaders of the people. If this
   happened among a people, whose wisdom the other nations had occasion to
   admire, what will become of others?"

   It is proper, however, to compare the words of the Prophet with those
   of Paul, and to examine the whole matter still more closely. The
   Prophet, indeed, makes use of neuter verbs when he says, Wisdom will
   perish and prudence will vanish, while Paul turns them into the active
   form, by making them have a reference to God. They are, however,
   perfectly the same in meaning. For this is a great prodigy which God
   declares he will exhibit, so that all will be filled with astonishment.
   Wisdom, therefore, perishes, but it is by the Lord's destroying it:
   wisdom vanishes, but it is by the Lord's covering it over and effacing
   it. As to the second term athetein, (which Erasmus renders reject,) as
   it is ambiguous, and is sometimes taken to mean efface, or expunge, or
   obliterate, I prefer to understand it in this sense here, so as to
   correspond with the Prophet's word vanish, or be hid. At the same time,
   there is another reason that has weighed more with me, [83] -- that the
   word reject was not in accordance with the subject, as will appear ere
   long. Let us see, then, as to the meaning.

   The Prophet's meaning, without doubt, is precisely this, that they
   would no longer have governors that would rule well, because the Lord
   will deprive them of sound judgment and intelligence. For as he
   elsewhere threatens to send blindness upon the whole nation (Isaiah
   6:10,) so here, upon the leaders; which is just as though he were
   plucking the eyes out of the body. However this may be, a great
   difficulty arises from the circumstance, that the term wisdom or
   prudence was taken by Isaiah in a good sense, while Paul quotes it for
   an opposite purpose, as though the wisdom of men were condemned by God,
   as being perverted, and their prudence set aside as being mere vanity.
   I confess that it is commonly expounded in this way; but as it is
   certain that the oracles of the Holy Spirit are not perverted by the
   Apostles to meanings foreign to their real design, I choose rather to
   depart from the common opinion of interpreters than to charge Paul with
   falsehood. In other respects, too, the natural meaning of the Prophet's
   words accords not ill with Paul's intention; for if even the wisest
   become fools, when the Lord takes away a right spirit, what confidence
   is to be placed in the wisdom of men? Farther, as it is God's usual way
   of punishing, to strike blind those who, following implicitly their own
   judgment, are wise in their own esteem, it is not to be wondered if
   carnal men, when they rise up against God, with the view of subjecting
   His eternal truth to their rashness, are turned into fools, and become
   vain in their imaginations. We now see with what appropriateness Paul
   makes use of this testimony. Isaiah declares that the vengeance of God
   upon all those that served God with their own inventions would be, that
   wisdom would vanish from their wise men. Paul, with the view of proving
   that the wisdom of this world is vain and worthless, when it exalts
   itself against God, adduces this testimony from Isaiah.

   20. Where is the wise? where is the scribe? This expression of triumph
   is added for the purpose of illustrating the Prophet's testimony. Paul
   has not taken this sentiment from Isaiah, as is commonly thought, but
   speaks in his own person. For the passage which they point to (Isaiah
   33:18) has nothing corresponding to the subject in hand, or nearly
   approaching to it. For in that passage, while he promises to the Jews
   deliverance from the yoke of Sennacherib, that he may magnify the more
   this great blessing from God, he shows how miserable is the condition
   of those that are oppressed by the tyranny of foreigners. He says, that
   they are in a constant fever of anxiety, from thinking themselves beset
   with scribes or questors, treasurers, and counters of towers. Nay more,
   he says, that the Jews were involved in such difficulties, that they
   were stirred up to gratitude by the very remembrance of them. [84] It
   is a mistake, therefore, to suppose that this sentence is taken from
   the Prophet. [85] The term world, ought not to be taken in connection
   with the last term merely, but also with the other two. Now, by the
   wise of this world, he means those who do not derive their wisdom from
   illumination by the Spirit through means of the word of God, but,
   endowed with mere worldly sagacity, rest on the assurance which it
   affords.

   It is generally agreed, that by the term scribes is meant teachers. For
   as sphr, saphar, among the Hebrews, means to relate or recount, and the
   noun derived from it, sphr, sepher,, is used by them to signify a book
   or volume, they employ the term svphrym, sopherim, to denote learned
   men, and those that are conversant with books; and, for the same
   reason, too, sopher regis is often used to denote a chancellor or
   secretary The Greeks, following the etymology of the Hebrew term, have
   translated it grammateis, scribes [86] He appropriately gives the name
   of investigators [87] to those that show off their acuteness by
   starting difficult points and involved questions. Thus in a general way
   he brings to nothing man's entire intellect, so as to give it no
   standing in the kingdom of God. Nor is it without good reason that he
   inveighs so vehemently against the wisdom of men, for it is impossible
   to express how difficult a thing it is to eradicate from men's minds a
   misdirected confidence in the flesh, that they may not claim for
   themselves more than is reasonable. Now there is more than ought to be,
   if, depending even in the slightest degree upon their own wisdom, they
   venture of themselves to form a judgment.

   Hath not God made foolish, etc By wisdom here he means everything that
   man can comprehend either by the natural powers of his understanding,
   or as deriving aid from practice, from learning, or from a knowledge of
   the arts. For he contrasts the wisdom of the world with the wisdom of
   the Spirit. Hence, whatever knowledge a man may come to have without
   the illumination of the Holy Spirit, is included in the expression, the
   wisdom of this world This he says God has utterly made foolish, that
   is, He has convicted it of folly. This you may understand to be
   effected in two ways; for whatever a man knows and understands, is mere
   vanity, if it is not grounded in true wisdom; and it is in no degree
   better fitted for the apprehension of spiritual doctrine than the eye
   of a blind man is for discriminating colors. We must carefully notice
   these two things -- that a knowledge of all the sciences is mere smoke,
   where the heavenly science of Christ is wanting; and man, with all his
   acuteness, is as stupid for obtaining of himself a knowledge of the
   mysteries of God, as an ass is unqualified for understanding musical
   harmonies. For in this way he reproves the destructive pride of those
   who glory in the wisdom of the world so as to despise Christ, and the
   entire doctrine of salvation, thinking themselves happy when they are
   taken up with creatures; and he beats down the arrogance of those who,
   trusting to their own understanding, attempt to scale heaven itself.

   There is also a solution furnished at the same time to the question,
   how it happens that Paul in this way throws down upon the ground every
   kind of knowledge that is apart from Christ, and tramples, as it were,
   under foot what is manifestly one of the chief gifts of God in this
   world. For what is more noble than man's reason, in which man excels
   the other animals? How richly deserving of honor are the liberal
   sciences, which polish man, so as to give him the dignity of true
   humanity! Besides this, what distinguished and choice fruits they
   produce! Who would not extol with the highest commendations civil
   prudence [88] (not to speak of other things,) by which governments,
   principalities, and kingdoms are maintained? A solution of this
   question, I say, is opened up to view from the circumstance, that Paul
   does not expressly condemn either man's natural perspicacity, or wisdom
   acquired from practice and experience, or cultivation of mind attained
   by learning; but declares that all this is of no avail for acquiring
   spiritual wisdom. And, certainly, it is madness for any one, confiding
   either in his own acuteness, or the assistance of learning, to attempt
   to fly up to heaven, or, in other words, to judge of the secret
   mysteries of the kingdom of God, [89] or to break through (Exodus
   19:21) to a discovery of them, for they are hid from human view. Let
   us, then, take notice, that we must restrict to the specialities of the
   case in hand what Paul here teaches respecting the vanity of the wisdom
   of this world -- that it rests in the mere elements of the world, and
   does not reach to heaven. In other respects, too, it holds true, that
   without Christ sciences in every department are vain, and that the man
   who knows not God is vain, though he should be conversant with every
   branch of learning. Nay more, we may affirm this, too, with truth, that
   these choice gifts of God -- expertness of mind, acuteness of judgment,
   liberal sciences, and acquaintance with languages, are in a manner
   profaned in every instance in which they fall to the lot of wicked men.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [71] "Ironie, c'est a dire, mocquerie;" -- "Irony, that is to say,
   mockery."

   [72] "Seulement en les arrousant d'eau: c'est a dire, baptizant;" --
   "Simply by sprinkling them with water, that is to say, baptizing."

   [73] "Toute la charge et la pesanteur du fardeau;" -- "The whole charge
   and weight of the burden."

   [74] "Vn Rhetoricien ou harangueur;" -- "A Rhetorician, or declaimer."

   [75] "Ces vaillans docteurs;" -- "Those valiant teachers."

   [76] The term logodaidalia properly denotes speech ingeniously
   contrived. It is compounded of logos (speech) and Daidalos (Daedalus,)
   an ingenious artist of Athens, celebrated for his skill in statuary and
   architecture. Hence everything that was skilfully contrived was called
   Daedalean. See Lucr. 4. 555, and 5. 235; Virg. G. 4. 179; and Aen. 7.
   282. -- Ed

   [77] "Eloquence et rhetorique;" -- "Eloquence and rhetoric."

   [78] "Vne bonne erudition, et scauoir solide;" -- "Good learning, and
   solid wisdom."

   [79] "Les Corinthiens auoyent les oreilles chatouilleuses, et estoyent
   transportez d'vn fol appetit d'auoir des gens qui eussent vn beau
   parler;" -- "The Corinthians had itching ears, (2 Timothy 4:3,) and
   were carried away with a silly eagerness to have persons that had a
   good manner of address."

   [80] "Les humbles;" -- "The humble."

   [81] "Ni a offusquer de sa pompe la croix de Christ, comme qui mettroit
   vne nuee au denant;" -- "Nor to darken the cross of Christ with its
   empty show, as if one were drawing a cloud over it."

   [82] "Brief, a seruir comme de trompette;" -- "In short, to serve as a
   trumpet."

   [83] "Combien que j'aye vne raison encore plus valable, qui m'a induit
   a changer ceste translation;" -- "At the same time, I have a still more
   forcible reason, which has induced me to alter this translation."

   [84] The passage referred to in Isaiah is happily rendered by
   Lowth:-Thine heart shall reflect on the past terror: Where is now the
   accomptant? where the weigher of tribute? where is he that numbered the
   towers? The last of these expressions Lowth explains to mean, "the
   commander of the enemy's forces, who surveyed the fortifications of the
   city, and took an account of the height, strength, and situation of the
   walls and towers, that he might know where to make the assault with the
   greatest advantage." -- Ed.

   [85] "The words of Paul, 1 Corinthians 1:20, pou sophos; pou
   grammateus; pou suzetetes k.t.l., are not, as some have imagined, a
   quotation of the words of this verse," (Isaiah 33:18;) "the only points
   of agreement between them being merely the occurrence of grammateus,
   and the repetition of the interrogative tou. It is not impossible,
   however, that the structure of the one passage may have suggested the
   other." -- Henderson on Isaiah. -- Ed

   [86] The Hebrew phrase referred to occurs in 2 Kings 12:10 sphr hmlk
   (the king's scribe.) It is rendered by the Septuagint, ho grammateus
   tou basileos The corresponding Greek term, grammateis is employed by
   the classical writers to denote a clerk or secretary, (Demosth.
   269.19.) The grammateis (notaries) "had the custody of the laws and the
   public records, which it was their business to write, and to repeat to
   the people and senate when so required." -- Potter's Grecian
   Antiquities, volume 1. -- Ed

   [87] Calvin, here has manifestly in his eye the original meaning of
   suzetetes, which is derived from sun and zeteo (to inquire together,)
   and comes very naturally to mean one that indulges in arguments or
   disputes. The term was applied to the subtle Sophists, or disputants in
   the Greek academies. -- Ed

   [88] "La prudence civile, c'est a dire la science des lois;" -- "Civil
   prudence, that is to say, the science of laws."

   [89] See Institutes, volume 1. -- Ed.
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 1:21-25

   21. For after that in the wisdom of God the world by wisdom knew not
   God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that
   believe.

   21. Quoniam enim in sapientia Dei non cognovit mundus per sapientiam
   Deum, placuit Deo per stultitiam praedicationis salvos facere
   credentes.

   22. For the Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom:

   22. Siquidem et Judaei signum petunt et Graeci sapientiam quaerunt.

   23. But we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumblingblock, and
   unto the Greeks foolishness;

   23. Nos autem praedicamus Christum crucifixum, Judaeis quidem
   scandalum, Graecis autem stultitiam:

   24. But unto them which are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the
   power of God, and the wisdom of God.

   24. Ipsis autem vocatis, tam Judaeis, quam Graecis, Christum Dei
   potentiam, et Dei sapientiara.

   25. Because the foolishness of God is wiser than men; and the weakness
   of God is stronger than men.

   25. Nam stultitia Dei sapientior est hominibus, et infirmitas Dei
   robustior est hominibus.


   21. For since the world knew not. The right order of things was
   assuredly this, that man, contemplating the wisdom of God in his works,
   by the light of the understanding furnished him by nature, might arrive
   at an acquaintance with him. As, however, this order of things has been
   reversed through man's depravity, God designs in the first place to
   make us see ourselves to be fools, before he makes us wise unto
   salvation, (2 Timothy 3:15;) and secondly, as a token of his wisdom, he
   presents to us what has some appearance of folly. This inversion of the
   order of things the ingratitude of mankind deserved. By the wisdom of
   God he means the workmanship of the whole world, which is an
   illustrious token and clear manifestation of his wisdom: God therefore
   presents before us in his creatures a bright mirror of his admirable
   wisdom, so that every one that looks upon the world, and the other
   works of God, must of necessity break forth in admiration of him, if he
   has a single spark of sound judgment. If men were guided to a right
   knowledge of God by the contemplation of his works, they would know God
   in the exercise of wisdom, or by a natural and proper method of
   acquiring wisdom; but as the whole world gained nothing in point of
   instruction from the circumstance, that God had exhibited his wisdom in
   his creatures, he then resorted to another method for instructing men.
   [90] Thus it must be reckoned as our own fault, that we do not attain a
   saving acquaintance with God, before we have been emptied of our own
   understanding.

   He makes a concession when he calls the gospel the foolishness of
   preaching, having that appearance in the view of those foolish sages
   (morosophois) who, intoxicated with false confidence, [91] fear not to
   subject God's sacred truth to their senseless criticism. And indeed in
   another point of view nothing is more absurd in the view, of human
   reason than to hear that God has become mortal -- that life has been
   subjected to death -- that righteousness has been veiled under the
   appearance of sin -- and that the source of blessing has been made
   subject to the curse, that by this means men might be redeemed from
   death, and become partakers of a blessed immortality -- that they might
   obtain life -- that, sin being destroyed, righteousness might reign --
   and that death and the curse might be swallowed up. We know,
   nevertheless, in the meantime, that the gospel is the hidden wisdom, (1
   Corinthians 2:7,) which in its height surmounts the heavens, and at
   which angels themselves stand amazed. Here we have a most beautiful
   passage, from which we may see how great is the blindness of the human
   mind, which in the midst of light discerns nothing. For it is true,
   that this world is like a theater, in which the Lord presents to us a
   clear manifestation of his glory, and yet, notwithstanding that we have
   such a spectacle placed before our eyes, we are stone-blind, not
   because the manifestation is furnished obscurely, but because we are
   alienated in mind, (Colossians 1:21,)and for this matter we lack not
   merely inclination but ability. For notwithstanding that God shows
   himself openly, it is only with the eye of faith that we can behold
   him, save only that we receive a slight perception of his divinity,
   sufficient to render us inexcusable.

   Accordingly, when Paul here declares that God is not known through
   means of his creatures, you must understand him to mean that a pure
   knowledge of him is not attained. For that none may have any pretext
   for ignorance, mankind make proficiency in the universal school of
   nature; so far as to be affected with some perception of deity, but
   what God is, they know not, nay more, they straightway become vain in
   their imaginations, (Romans 1:21.) Thus the light shineth in darkness,
   (John 1:5.) It follows, then, that mankind do not err thus far through
   mere ignorance, so as not to be chargeable with contempt, negligence,
   and ingratitude. Thus it holds good, that all

   have known God, and yet have not glorified him,
   (Romans 1:21,)

   and that, on the other hand, no one under the guidance of mere nature
   ever made such proficiency as to know God. Should any one bring forward
   the philosophers as exceptions, I answer, that in them more especially
   there is presented a signal token of this our weakness. For there will
   not be found one of them, that has not from that first principle of
   knowledge, which I have mentioned, straightway turned aside into
   wandering [92] and erroneous speculations, and for the most part they
   betray a silliness worse than that of old wives. When he says, that
   those are saved that believe, this corresponds with the foregoing
   statement -- that the gospel is the power of God unto salvation
   Farther, by contrasting believers, whose number is small, with a blind
   and senseless world, he teaches us that we err if we stumble at the
   smallness of their number, inasmuch as they have been divinely set
   apart to salvation.

   22. For the Jews require a sign This is explanatory of the preceding
   statement -- showing in what respects the preaching of the gospel is
   accounted foolishness At the same time he does not simply explain, but
   even goes a step farther, by saying that the Jews do not merely despise
   the gospel, but even abhor it. "The Jews," says he, "desire through
   means of miracles to have before their eyes an evidence of divine
   power: the Greeks are fond of what tends to gratify human intellect by
   the applause of acuteness. We, on the other hand, preach Christ
   crucified, wherein there appears at first view nothing but weakness and
   folly. He is, therefore, a stumblingblock to the Jews, when they see
   him as it were forsaken by God. To the Greeks it appears like a fable,
   to be told of such a method of redemption." By the term Greeks here, in
   my opinion, he does not mean simply Gentiles, but has in view those who
   had the polish of the liberal sciences, or were distinguished by
   superior intelligence. At the same time by synecdoche, all the others
   come in like manner to be included. Between Jews and Greeks, however,
   he draws this distinction, that the former, striking against Christ by
   an unreasonable zeal for the law, raged against the gospel with
   unbounded fury, as hypocrites are wont to do, when contending for their
   superstitions; while the Greeks, on the other hand, puffed up with
   pride, regarded him with contempt as insipid.

   When he ascribes it to the Jews as a fault, that they are eagerly
   desirous of signs, it is not on the ground of its being wrong in itself
   to demand signs, but he exposes their baseness in the following
   respects: -- that by an incessant demand for miracles, they in a manner
   sought to bind God to their laws -- that, in accordance with the
   dullness of their apprehension, they sought as it were to feel him out
   [93] in manifest miracles -- that they were taken up with the miracles
   themselves, and looked upon them with amazement -- and, in fine, that
   no miracles satisfied them, but instead of this, they every day gaped
   incessantly for new ones. Hezekiah is not reproved for having of his
   own accord allowed himself to be confirmed by a sign, (2 Kings 19:29,
   and 2 Kings 20:8,) nor even Gideon for asking a two-fold sign, (Judges
   6:37, 39.) Nay, instead of this, Ahaz is condemned for refusing a sign
   that the Prophet had offered him, (Isaiah 7:12.) What fault, then, was
   there on the part of the Jews in asking miracles? It lay in this, that
   they did not ask them for a good end, set no bounds to their desire,
   and did not make a right use of them. For while faith ought to be
   helped by miracles, their only concern was, how long they might
   persevere in their unbelief. While it is unlawful to prescribe laws to
   God, they wantoned with inordinate desire. While miracles should
   conduct us to an acquaintance with Christ, and the spiritual grace of
   God, they served as a hindrance in their way. On this account, too,
   Christ upbraids them, (Mark 8:12.)

   A perverse generation seeketh after a sign.

   For there were no bounds to their curiosity and inordinate desire, and
   for all that they had so often obtained miracles, no advantage appeared
   to arise from them.

   24. Both Greeks and Jews He shows by this contrast, that the fact that
   Christ was so unfavorably received, was not owing to any fault on his
   part, nor to the natural disposition of mankind generally, but arose
   from the depravity of those who were not enlightened by God, inasmuch
   as the elect of God, whether Jews or Gentiles, are not hindered by any
   stumblingblock from coming to Christ, that they may find in him a sure
   salvation. He contrasts power with the stumblingblock, that was
   occasioned by abasement, and wisdom he contrasts with folly The sum,
   then, is this: -- "I am aware that nothing except signs has effect upon
   the obstinacy of the Jews, and that nothing soothes down the
   haughtiness of the Greeks, except an empty show of wisdom. We ought,
   however, to make no account of this; because, however our Christ in
   connection with the abasement of his cross is a stumblingblock to the
   Jews, and is derided by the Greeks, he is, notwithstanding, to all the
   elect, of whatever nation they may be, at once the power of God unto
   salvation for surmounting these stumblingblocks, and the wisdom of God
   for throwing off that mask." [94]

   25. For the foolishness of God While the Lord deals with us in such a
   way as to seem to act foolishly, because he does not exhibit his
   wisdom, what appears foolishness surpasses in wisdom all the ingenuity
   of men. Farther, while God appears to act with weakness, in consequence
   of his concealing his power, that weakness, as it is reckoned, is
   stronger than any power of men. We must, however, always keep it in
   view, that there is a concession, as I have noticed a little ago. For
   no one can but perceive, that in strict propriety neither foolishness
   nor weakness can be ascribed to God, but it was necessary, by such
   ironical expressions, to beat down the mad presumption of the flesh,
   which does not scruple to rob God of all his glory.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [90] The reader will find the same train of thought as above in the
   Institutes, volume 1. -- Ed.

   [91] "Et outrecuidance;" -- "And presumption."

   [92] "Extrauagantes;" -- "Extravagant."

   [93] There can be no doubt that Calvin refers here to an expression
   made use of by Paul in his discourse to the Athenians, Acts 17:27 Ei
   ara ge pselapheseian auton kai euroien (if haply they may feel him out
   and find him.) The allusion is to a blind man feeling his way The same
   word is employed by Plato, (Phoed. footnote 47, edit. Forster.) O de
   moi phainontai pselaphontes hoi polloi hosper en skotei, (In this
   respect the many seem to me to be feeling their way as it were in the
   dark.) -- Ed

   [94] "Pour oster et faire esvanoir ceste vaine apparence, et masque de
   sagesse;" -- "For taking away and causing to vanish, that empty show
   and mask of wisdom."
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 1:26-31

   26. For ye see your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men after
   the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called:

   26. Videte (vel, videtis) vocationem vestram, fratres, quod non multi
   [95] sapientes secundum carnem, non multi potentes, non multi nobiles:

   27. But God hath chosen the foolish things of the world, to confound
   the wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound
   the things which are mighty;

   27. Sed stulta mundi elegit Deus, ut sapientes pudefaciat: et infirma
   mundi elegit Deus, ut patifaciat fortia:

   28. And base things of the world, and things which are despised, hath
   God chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring to naught things
   that are:

   28. Et ignobilia mundi et contempta elegit Deus, et ea quae non erant,
   ut quae erant aboleret;

   29. That no flesh should glory in his presence.

   29. Ne glorietur ulla caro coram Deo.

   30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us
   wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption:

   30. Ex ipso vos estis [96] in Christo Jesu, qui factus est nobis
   sapientia a Deo, et justitia, et sanctificatio, et redemptio. [97]

   31. That, according as it is written, He that glorieth, let him glory
   in the Lord.

   31. Ut (quemadmodum scriptum est) Qui gloriatur, in Domino glorietur
   (Jeremiah 9:24.)


   26. Behold your calling. As the mood of the Greek verb (blepete) is
   doubtful, and the indicative suits the context equally as well as the
   imperative, I leave it to the reader's choice which of them he may
   prefer. The meaning is manifestly the same in either case, for
   supposing it to be the indicative (ye see,) he would in that case
   summon them as witnesses -- as of a thing that is manifest, and call
   them forward as it were to a thing that is present. On the other hand,
   understanding it in the imperative, he stirs them up, as it were, from
   their drowsiness to a consideration of the matter itself. The term
   calling may be taken in a collective sense to mean the multitude of
   those that are called -- in this sense: "Ye see what description of
   persons they are among you that the Lord has called." I am, however,
   rather inclined to think, that he points out the manner of their
   calling, and it is a most forcible argument, because it follows from
   this, that, if they despise the abasement of the cross, they in a
   manner make void their calling, in which God had acted in such a
   manner, as to take away all merit from human wisdom, and power, and
   glory. Hence he tacitly accuses them of ingratitude, because, forgetful
   alike of God's grace and of themselves, they regard the gospel of
   Christ with disdain.

   Two things, however, must be observed here -- that he was desirous from
   the example of the Corinthians to confirm the truth of what he had
   said: and farther, that he designed to admonish them, that they must be
   entirely divested of pride, if they duly considered the order of things
   that the Lord had observed in their calling. To put to shame, says he,
   the wise and noble, and to bring to naught things that are Both
   expressions are appropriate, for fortitude and wisdom vanish when they
   are put to shame, but what has an existence requires to be brought to
   naught By the choosing of the poor, and the foolish, and the ignoble,
   he means, that God has preferred them before the great, and the wise,
   and the noble. For it would not have sufficed, for beating down the
   arrogance of the flesh, if God had placed them all upon a level. Hence,
   those who appeared to excel he put in the background, in order that he
   might thoroughly abase them. That man, however, were an arrant fool,
   who would infer from this, that God has in this manner abased the glory
   of the flesh, in order that the great and noble might be shut out from
   the hope of salvation. There are some foolish persons that make this a
   pretext for not merely triumphing over the great, as if God had cast
   them off, but even despising them as far beneath them. Let us, however,
   bear in mind, that this is said to the Corinthians, who, though they
   had no great distinction in the world, were nevertheless, even without
   any occasion, puffed up. God, therefore, by confounding the mighty, and
   the wise, and the great, does not design to elate with pride the weak,
   the illiterate, and the abject, but brings down all of them together to
   one level. Let those, therefore, that are contemptible in the eyes of
   the world, think thus with themselves: "What modesty is called for on
   our part, when even those that have high honor in the view of the world
   have nothing left them?" [98] If the effulgence of the sun is obscured,
   what must become of the stars? If the light of the stars is
   extinguished, what must become of opaque objects?" The design of these
   observations is, that those who have been called by the Lord, while of
   no estimation in the view of the world, may not abuse these words of
   Paul by pluming their crests, but, on the contrary, keeping in mind the
   exhortation --

   Thou standest by faith, be not high-minded, but fear,
   (Romans 11:20,)

   may walk thoughtfully in the sight of God with fear and humility.

   Paul, however, does not say here, that there are none of the noble and
   mighty that have been called by God, but that there are few He states
   the design of this -- that the Lord might bring down the glory of the
   flesh, by preferring the contemptible before the great. God himself,
   however, by the mouth of David, exhorts kings to embrace Christ, [99]
   (Psalm 2:12,) and by the mouth of Paul, too, he declares, that he will
   have all men to be saved, and that his Christ is offered alike to small
   and great, alike to kings and their subjects, (1 Timothy 2:1-4.) He has
   himself furnished a token of this. Shepherds, in the first place, are
   called to Christ: then afterwards come philosophers: illiterate and
   despised fishermen hold the highest rank of honor; yet into their
   school there are received in process of time kings and their
   counselors, senators and orators.

   28. Things that are not He makes use of similar terms in Romans 4:17,
   but in a different sense. For in that passage, when describing the
   universal call of the pious, he says, that we are nothing previously to
   our being called, which must be understood as referring to reality in
   the sight of God, however we may appear to be something in the eyes of
   men. Here, the nothingness (oudeneia) of which he speaks must be viewed
   as referring to the opinion of men, as is manifest from the
   corresponding clause, in which he says that this is done in order that
   the things that are may be brought to naught For there is nothing
   except in appearance, because in reality we are all nothing. Things
   that are, therefore, you must explain to mean things that appear, so
   that this passage corresponds with such statements as these: --

   He raiseth up the poor out of the dunghill, (Psalm 113:7.)

   He raiseth up them that are cast down, (Psalm 146:8,)

   and the like. Hence we may clearly see how great is the folly of those
   who imagine that there is in mankind some degree of merit or
   worthiness, which would hold a place antecedent to God's choice.

   29. That no flesh should glory Though the term flesh here, and in many
   passages of Scripture, denotes all mankind, yet in this passage it
   carries with it a particular idea; for the Spirit, by speaking of
   mankind in terms of contempt, beats down their pride, as in Isaiah 31:3
   -- The Egyptian is flesh and not spirit It is a sentiment that is
   worthy to be kept in remembrance -- that there is nothing left us in
   which we may justly glory. With this view he adds the expression in
   God's presence For in the presence of the world many delight themselves
   for the moment in a false glorying, which, however, quickly vanishes
   like smoke. At the same time, by this expression all mankind are put to
   silence when they come into the presence of God; as Habakkuk says --

   Let all flesh keep silence before God, (Habakkuk 2:20.)

   Let every thing, therefore, that is at all deserving of praise, be
   recognized as proceeding from God.

   30. Of him are ye. Lest they should think that any of those things that
   he had said were inapplicable to them, he now shows the application of
   those things to them, inasmuch as they are not otherwise than of God
   For the words ye are are emphatic, as though he had said -- "You have
   your beginning from God, who calleth those things which are not,"
   (Romans 4:17,) passing by those things that appear to be; and your
   subsistence is founded upon Christ, and thus you have no occasion to be
   proud. Nor is it of creation merely that he speaks, but of that
   spiritual existence, into which we are born again by the grace of God.

   Who of God is made unto us As there are many to be found who, while not
   avowedly inclined to draw back from God, do nevertheless seek something
   apart from Christ, as if he alone did not contain all things [100] in
   himself, he reckons up in passing what and how great are the treasures
   with which Christ is furnished, and in such a way as to intimate at the
   same time what is the manner of subsistence in Christ. For when he
   calls Christ our righteousness, a corresponding idea must be understood
   -- that in us there is nothing but sin; and so as to the other terms.
   Now he ascribes here to Christ four commendatory titles, that include
   his entire excellence, and every benefit that we receive from him.

   In the first place, he says that he is made unto us wisdom, by which he
   means, that we obtain in him an absolute perfection of wisdom, inasmuch
   as the Father has fully revealed himself to us in him, that we may not
   desire to know any thing besides him. There is a similar passage in
   Colossians 2:3 --

   In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.

   Of this we shall have occasion to speak afterwards when we come to the
   next chapter.

   Secondly, he says that he is made unto us righteousness, by which he
   means that we are on his account acceptable to God, inasmuch as he
   expiated our sins by his death, and his obedience is imputed to us for
   righteousness. For as the righteousness of faith consists in remission
   of sins and a gracious acceptance, we obtain both through Christ.

   Thirdly, he calls him our sanctification, by which he means, that we
   who are otherwise unholy by nature, are by his Spirit renewed unto
   holiness, that we may serve God. From this, also, we infer, that we
   cannot be justified freely through faith alone without at the same time
   living holily. For these fruits of grace are connected together, as it
   were, by an indissoluble tie, [101] so that he who attempts to sever
   them does in a manner tear Christ in pieces. Let therefore the man who
   seeks to be justified through Christ, by God's unmerited goodness,
   consider that this cannot be attained without his taking him at the
   same time for sanctification, or, in other words, being renewed to
   innocence and purity of life. Those, however, that slander us, as if by
   preaching a free justification through faith we called men off from
   good works, are amply refuted from this passage, which intimates that
   faith apprehends in Christ regeneration equally with forgiveness of
   sins.

   Observe, on the other hand, that these two offices of Christ are
   conjoined in such a manner as to be, notwithstanding, distinguished
   from each other. What, therefore, Paul here expressly distinguishes, it
   is not allowable mistakenly to confound.

   Fourthly, he teaches us that he is given to us for redemption, by which
   he means, that through his goodness we are delivered at once from all
   bondage to sin, and from all the misery that flows from it. Thus
   redemption is the first gift of Christ that is begun in us, and the
   last that is completed. For the commencement of salvation consists in
   our being drawn out of the labyrinth of sin and death; yet in the
   meantime, until the final day of the resurrection, we groan with desire
   for redemption, (as we read in Romans 8:23.) If it is asked in what way
   Christ is given to us for redemption, I answer -- "Because he made
   himself a ransom."

   In fine, of all the blessings that are here enumerated we must seek in
   Christ not the half, or merely a part, but the entire completion. For
   Paul does not say that he has been given to us by way of filling up, or
   eking out righteousness, holiness, wisdom, and redemption, but assigns
   to him exclusively the entire accomplishment of the whole. Now as you
   will scarcely meet with another passage of Scripture that more
   distinctly marks out all the offices of Christ, you may also understand
   from it very clearly the nature and efficacy of faith. For as Christ is
   the proper object of faith, every one that knows what are the benefits
   that Christ confers upon us is at the same time taught to understand
   what faith is.

   31. He that glorieth let him glory in the Lord Mark the end that God
   has in view in bestowing all things upon us in Christ -- that we may
   not claim any merit to ourselves, but may give him all the praise. For
   God does not despoil with the view of leaving us bare, but forthwith
   clothes us with his glory -- yet on this condition, that whenever we
   would glory we must go out of ourselves. In short, man, brought to
   nothing in his own estimation, and acknowledging that there is nothing
   good anywhere but in God alone, must renounce all desire for his own
   glory, and with all his might aspire and aim at the glory of God
   exclusively. This is also more clearly apparent from the context in the
   writings of the Prophet, from whom Paul has borrowed this testimony;
   for in that passage the Lord, after stripping all mankind of glory in
   respect of strength, wisdom, and riches, commands us to glory only in
   knowing him, (Jeremiah 9:23, 24.) Now he would have us know him in such
   a way as to know that it is he that exercises judgment, righteousness,
   and mercy For this knowledge produces in us at once confidence in him
   and fear of him. If therefore a man has his mind regulated in such a
   manner that, claiming no merit to himself, he desires that God alone be
   exalted; if he rests with satisfaction on his grace, and places his
   entire happiness in his fatherly love, and, in fine, is satisfied with
   God alone, that man truly "glories in the Lord." I say truly, for even
   hypocrites on false grounds glory in him, as Paul declares, (Romans
   2:17,) when being either puffed up with his gifts, or elated with a
   base confidence in the flesh, or abusing his word, they nevertheless
   take his name upon them.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [95] "Que vous n'estes point beaucoup;" -- "That you are not many."

   [96] "Or c'est de luy que vous estes;" -- "Now it is of him that ye
   are."

   [97] "Redemption, ou rancon;" -- "Redemption, or ransom"

   [98] "Dieu ne permet de presumer d'eux mesmes;" -- "God does not allow
   them to have confidence in themselves."

   [99] "A faire hommage a Christ;" -- "To do homage to Christ."

   [100] "Toute plenitude;" -- "All fulness." (Colossians 1:19.)

   [101] The reader will find the same train of thought as above in the
   Institutes, volume 2. -- Ed.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 2
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 2:1-2

   1. And I, brethren, when I came to you, came not with excellency of
   speech or of wisdom, declaring unto you the testimony of God.

   1. Et ego, quum venissem ad vos, fratres, veni non in excellentia
   sermonis vel sapientiae, annuntians vobis testimonium Dei.

   2. For I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ,
   and him crucified.

   2. Non enim eximium duxi, (vel, duxi pro scientia,) scire quicquam
   inter vos, [102] nisi Iesum Christum, et hunc crucifixum.


   1. And I, when I came Paul having begun to speak of his own method of
   teaching, had straightway fallen into a discussion as to the nature of
   gospel preaching generally. Now again he returns to speak of himself,
   to show that nothing in him was despised but what belonged to the
   nature of the gospel itself, and did in a manner adhere to it. He
   allows therefore that he had not had any of the aids of human eloquence
   or wisdom to qualify him for producing any effect, but while he
   acknowledges himself to be destitute of such resources, he hints at the
   inference to be drawn from this -- that the power of God shone the more
   illustriously in his ministry, from its standing in no need of such
   helps. This latter idea, however, he will be found bringing forward
   shortly afterwards. For the present he simply grants that he has
   nothing of human wisdom, and in the meantime reserves to himself this
   much -- that he published the testimony of God Some interpreters,
   indeed, explain the testimony of God in a passive sense; but as for
   myself, I have no doubt that another interpretation is more in
   accordance with the Apostle's design, so that the testimony of God is
   that which has come forth from God -- the doctrine of the gospel, of
   which he is the author and witness. He now distinguishes between speech
   and wisdom (logon apo tos sophias.) Hence what I noticed before [103]
   is here confirmed -- that hitherto he has not been speaking of mere
   empty prattling, but has included the entire training of human
   learning.

   2. For I did not reckon it desirable. As krinein, in Greek, has often
   the same meaning as eklegein, that is to choose out anything as
   precious, [104] there is, I think, no person of sound judgment but will
   allow that the rendering that I have given is a probable one, provided
   only the construction admits of it. At the same time, if we render it
   thus -- "No kind of knowledge did I hold in esteem," there will be
   nothing harsh in this rendering. If you understand something to be
   supplied, the sentence will run smoothly enough in this way -- "Nothing
   did I value myself upon, as worth my knowing, or on the ground of
   knowledge." At the same time I do not altogether reject a different
   interpretation -- viewing Paul as declaring that he esteemed nothing as
   knowledge, or as entitled to be called knowledge, except Christ alone.
   Thus the Greek preposition and, would, as often happens, require to be
   supplied. But whether the former interpretation is not disapproved of,
   or whether this latter pleases better, the substance of the passage
   amounts to this: "As to my wanting the ornaments of speech, and
   wanting, too, the more elegant refinements of discourse, the reason of
   this was, that I did not aspire at them, nay rather, I despised them,
   because there was one thing only that my heart was set upon -- that I
   might preach Christ with simplicity."

   In adding the word crucified, he does not mean that he preached nothing
   respecting Christ except the cross; but that, with all the abasement of
   the cross, he nevertheless preached Christ. It is as though he had
   said: "The ignominy of the cross will not prevent me from looking up to
   him [105] from whom salvation comes, or make me ashamed to regard all
   my wisdom as comprehended in him -- in him, I say, whom proud men
   despise and reject on account of the reproach of the cross." Hence the
   statement must be explained in this way: "No kind of knowledge was in
   my view of so much importance as to lead me to desire anything but
   Christ, crucified though he was." This little clause is added by way of
   enlargement (auxesin,) with the view of galling so much the more those
   arrogant masters, by whom Christ was next to despised, as they were
   eager to gain applause by being renowned for a higher kind of wisdom.
   Here we have a beautiful passage, from which we learn what it is that
   faithful ministers ought to teach, what it is that we must, during our
   whole life, be learning, and in comparison with which everything else
   must be "counted as dung." (Philippians 3:8.)
     __________________________________________________________________

   [102] "Car je n'ay point eu en estime de scauoir aucune chose ou rien
   deli-ber~ de sqauoir entre vous:" -- "I had nothing in esteem as
   knowledge; or, I determined to know nothing among you."

   [103] Calvin refers to what he had said when commenting on an
   expression which occurs in chap. 1:17 -- not with wisdom of words.

   [104] Xenophon uses krino in the sense of choosing out, or preferring:
   in Mem. 4. 4, sec. 16, ouch hopos tous autous chorous krinosin hoi
   politai -- not that the citizens should prefer the dances." See also
   Menander, prefer the same line 245, edit. Cleric. In the New Testament
   we find krino used in the sense of esteeming, in Romans 14:5. -- Ed

   [105] "Ne fera point que ie n'aye en reuerence et admiration;" -- "Will
   not prevent me from holding in reverence and admiration."
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 2:3-5

   3. And I was with you in weakness, and in fear, and in much trembling.

   3. Et ego in infirmirate, [106] et in timore, et in tremore multo fui
   apud vos:

   4. And my speech and my preaching was not with enticing words of man's
   wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power:

   4. Et sermo meus, et praedicatio mea, non in persuasoriis humanae
   sapientiae sermonibus, sed in demonstratione Spiritus et potentiae:

   5. That your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the
   power of God.

   5. Ut fides vestra non sit in sapientia hominum, sed in potentia Dei.


   3. And I was with you in weakness He explains at greater length what he
   had previously touched upon -- that he had nothing shining or excellent
   in him in the eyes of men, to raise him to distinction. He concedes,
   however, to his adversaries what they desired in such a way as to make
   those very things which, in their opinion, tended to detract from the
   credit of his ministry, redound to its highest commendation. If he
   appeared less worthy of esteem from his being so mean and abject
   according to the flesh, he shows that the power of God shone out the
   more conspicuously in this, that he could effect so much, while
   sustained by no human helps. He has in his eye not merely those foolish
   boasters [107] who aimed at mere show, with the view of obtaining for
   themselves a name, but the Corinthians, too, who gazed with
   astonishment on their empty shows. Accordingly a recital of this kind
   was fitted to have great weight with them. They were aware that Paul
   had brought nothing with him in respect of the flesh that was fitted to
   help him forward, or that might enable him to insinuate himself into
   the favor of men, and yet they had seen the amazing success which the
   Lord had vouchsafed to his preaching. Nay more, they had in a manner
   beheld with their own eyes the Spirit of God present in his doctrine.
   When, therefore, despising his simplicity, they were tickled with a
   desire for a kind of wisdom, I know not of what sort, more puffed up
   and more polished, and were captivated with outward appearance, nay,
   even with adventitious ornament, rather than with the living efficacy
   of the Spirit, did they not sufficiently discover their ambitious
   spirit? It is with good reason, therefore, that Paul puts them in mind
   of his first entering in among them, (1 Thessalonians 2:1,) that they
   may not draw back from that divine efficacy, which they once knew by
   experience.

   The term weakness he employs here, and in several instances afterwards,
   (2 Corinthians 11:30; 2 Corinthians 12:5, 9, 10,) as including
   everything that can detract from a person's favor and dignity in the
   opinion of others. Fear and trembling are the effects of that weakness
   There are, however, two ways in which these two terms may be explained
   by us. Either we may understand him to mean, that when he pondered the
   magnitude of the office that he sustained, it was tremblingly, and not
   without great anxiety, that he occupied himself in it; or that, being
   encompassed with many dangers, he was in constant alarm and incessant
   anxiety. Either meaning suits the context sufficiently well. The
   second, however, is, in my opinion, the more simple. Such a spirit of
   modesty, indeed, becomes the servants of the Lord, that, conscious of
   their own weakness, and looking, on the other hand, at once to the
   difficulty and the excellence of so arduous an office, they should
   enter on the discharge of it with reverence and fear For those that
   intrude themselves confidently, and in a spirit much elated, or who
   discharge the ministry of the word with an easy mind, as though they
   were fully equal to the task, are ignorant at once of themselves and of
   the task. [108]

   As, however, Paul here connects fear with weakness, and as the term
   weakness denotes everything that was fitted to render him contemptible,
   it follows necessarily that this fear must relate to dangers and
   difficulties. It is certain, however, that this fear was of such a
   nature as did not prevent Paul from engaging in the Lord's work, as
   facts bear witness. The Lord's servants are neither so senseless as not
   to perceive impending dangers, nor so devoid of feeling as not to be
   moved by them. Nay more, it is necessary for them to be seriously
   afraid on two accounts chiefly -- first, that, abased in their own
   eyes, they may learn wholly to lean and rest upon God alone, and
   secondly, that they may be trained to a thorough renunciation of self.
   Paul, therefore, was not devoid of the influence of fear, but that fear
   he controlled in such a manner as to go forward, notwithstanding, with
   intrepidity through the midst of dangers, so as to encounter with
   undaunted firmness and fortitude all the assaults of Satan and of the
   world; and, in fine, so as to struggle through every impediment.

   4. And my preaching was not in the persuasive words. By the persuasive
   words of man's wisdom he means that exquisite oratory which aims and
   strives rather by artifice than by truth, and also an appearance of
   refinement, that allures the minds of men. It is not without good
   reason, too, that he ascribes persuasiveness (to pithanon) [109] to
   human wisdom. For the word of the Lord constrains us by its majesty, as
   if by a violent impulse, to yield obedience to it. Human wisdom, on the
   other hand, has her allurements, by which she insinuates herself [110]
   and her blandishments, as it were, by which she may conciliate for
   herself the affections of her hearers. With this he contrasts the
   demonstration of the Spirit and of power, which most interpreters
   consider as restricted to miracles; but I take it in a more general
   sense, as meaning the hand of God powerfully exercised in every way
   through the instrumentality of the Apostle. Spirit and power he seems
   to have made use of by hypallage, [111] (kath ' hupallagen,) to denote
   spiritual power, or at least with the view of showing by signs and
   effects in what manner the presence of the Spirit had shown itself in
   his ministry. He appropriately, too, makes use of the term apodeixeos,
   (demonstration;) for such is our dullness in contemplating the works of
   God, that when he makes use of inferior instruments, they serve as so
   many veils to hide from us his influence, so that we do not clearly
   perceive it. On the other hand, as in the furtherance given to Paul's
   ministry, there was no aid furnished from the flesh or the world, and
   as the hand of God was as it were made bare, (Isaiah 52:10,) his
   influence was assuredly the more apparent.

   5. That your faith should not be in the wisdom of men. To be is used
   here as meaning to consist His meaning, then, is, that the Corinthians
   derived this advantage from his having preached Christ among them
   without dependence on human wisdom, and relying solely on the Spirit's
   influence, that their faith was founded not on men but on God. If the
   Apostle's preaching had rested exclusively on the power of eloquence,
   it might have been overthrown by superior eloquence, and besides, no
   one would pronounce that to be solid truth which rests on mere elegance
   of speech. It may indeed be helped by it, but it ought not to rest upon
   it On the other hand, that must have been most powerful which could
   stand of itself without any foreign aid. Hence it forms a choice
   commendation of Paul's preaching, that heavenly influence shone forth
   in it so clearly, that it surmounted so many hindrances, while deriving
   no assistance from the world. It follows, therefore, that they must not
   allow themselves to be moved away from his doctrine, which they
   acknowledge to rest on the authority of God. Paul, however, speaks here
   of the faith of the Corinthians in such a way as to bring forward this,
   as a general statement. Let it then be known by us that it is the
   property of faith to rest upon God alone, without depending on men; for
   it requires to have so much certainty to go upon, that it will not
   fail, even when assailed by all the machinations of hell, but will
   perseveringly endure and sustain every assault. This cannot be
   accomplished unless we are fully persuaded that God has spoken to us,
   and that what we have believed is no mere contrivance of men. While
   faith ought properly to be founded on the word of God alone, there is
   at the same time no impropriety in adding this second prop, -- that
   believers recognize the word which they hear as having come forth from
   God, from the effect of its influence.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [106] "En infirmite ou foiblesse;" -- "In weakness or feebleness."

   [107] "Thrasones." The appellation is borrowed from Thraso, a foolish
   captain in Terence (Eun. 3:1.) -- Ed.

   [108] "Ne cognoissent ni eux ni la chose qu'ils ont entre mains;" --
   "They know not either themselves or the thing that they have in hand."

   [109] This passage has largely exercised the ingenuity of critics, from
   the circumstance that the adjective peithois, occurring nowhere else in
   the New Testament, or in any of the writings of classical authors, it
   is supposed that there has been some corruption of the reading. Some
   suppose it to be a contraction or corruption of peithanois or
   pithasois, and Chrysostom, in one or two instances, when quoting the
   passage, uses the adjective pithanois, while in other cases he has
   peithois It is perhaps in allusion to those instances in which
   Chrysostom makes use of the adjective pithasois, that Calvin employs
   the phrase to pithanon (persuasiveness.) Semler, after adducing various
   authorities, suggests the following reading: -- en peithoi sophais
   taking peithoi; as the dative of he peitho, (persuasion.) Bloomfield
   considers peithoi, to be a highly probable reading, but prefers to
   retain peithois. -- Ed

   [110] "Secrettement et doucement;" -- "Secretly and softly."

   [111] A figure of speech by which words change their cases with each
   other. -- Ed.
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 2:6-9

   6. Howbeit we speak wisdom among them that are perfect: yet not the
   wisdom of this world, nor of the princes of this world, that come to
   naught:

   6. Porro sapientiam loquimur inter perfectos: sapientiam quidem non
   saeculi hujus, neque principum saeculi hujus, qui abolentur:

   7. But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom,
   which God ordained before the world unto our glory:

   7. Sed loquimur sapientiam Dei in mysterio, quae est recondita: quam
   praefinivit Deus ante saecula in gloriam nostram,

   8. Which none of the princes of this world knew: for had they known it,
   they would not have crucified the Lord of glory.

   8. Quam nemo principum saeculi hujus cognovit: si emro cognovissent,
   nequaquam Dominum gloriae crucifixissent.

   9. But as it is written, Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have
   entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for
   them that love him.

   9. Sed quemadmodum Scriptum est (Ies. 64:4.) "Quae oculus non vidit,
   nec auris audivit, nec in cor hominis ascenderunt, quae praeparavit
   Deus iis, qui ipsum diligunt."


   6. We speak wisdom Lest he should appear to despise wisdom, as
   unlearned and ignorant men (Acts 4:13) condemn learning with a sort of
   barbarian ferocity, he adds, that he is not devoid of that wisdom,
   which was worthy of the name, but was esteemed as such by none but
   competent judges. By those that were perfect, he means not those that
   had attained a wisdom that was full and complete, but those who possess
   a sound and unbiased judgment. For tm, which is always rendered in the
   Septuagint by teleios means complete [112] He twits, however, in
   passing, those that had no relish for his preaching, and gives them to
   understand that it was owing to their own fault: "If my doctrine is
   disrelished by any of you, those persons give sufficient evidence from
   that very token, that they possess a depraved and vitiated
   understanding, inasmuch as it will invariably be acknowledged to be the
   highest wisdom among men of sound intellect and correct judgment."
   While Paul's preaching was open to the view of all, it was,
   nevertheless, not always estimated according to its value, and this is
   the reason why he appeals to sound and unbiased judges, [113] who would
   declare that doctrine, which the world accounted insipid, to be true
   wisdom. Meanwhile, by the words we speak, he intimates that he set
   before them an elegant specimen of admirable wisdom, lest any one
   should allege that he boasted of a thing unknown.

   Yet not the wisdom of this world He again repeats by way of
   anticipation what he had already conceded -- that the gospel was not
   human wisdom, lest any one should object that there were few supporters
   of that doctrine; nay more, that it was contemned by all that were most
   distinguished for intellect. Hence he acknowledges of his own accord
   what might be brought forward by way of objection, but in such a way as
   not at all to give up his point.

   The princes of this world By the princes of this world he means those
   that have distinction in the world through means of any endowment, for
   sometimes there are persons, who, though they are by no means
   distinguished by acuteness of intellect, are nevertheless held in
   admiration from the dignity of the station which they hold. That,
   however, we may not be alarmed by these imposing appearances, the
   Apostle adds, that they come to nought, or perish. For it were
   unbefitting, that a thing that is eternal should depend upon the
   authority of those who are frail, and fading, and cannot give
   perpetuity even to themselves: "When the kingdom of God is revealed,
   let the wisdom of this world retire, and what is transient give place
   to what is eternal; for the princes of this world have their
   distinction, but it is of such a nature as is in one moment
   extinguished. What is this in comparison with the heavenly and
   incorruptible kingdom of God?"

   7. The wisdom of God in a mystery He assigns the reason why the
   doctrine of the gospel is not held in high esteem by the princes of
   this world -- because it is involved in mysteries, and is consequently
   hidden For the gospel so far transcends the perspicacity of human
   intellect, that to whatever height those who are accounted men of
   superior intellect may raise their view, they never can reach its
   elevated height, while in the meantime they despise its meanness, as if
   it were prostrate at their feet. The consequence is, that the more
   proudly they contemn it, they are the farther from acquaintance with it
   -- nay more, they are removed to so great a distance as to be prevented
   from even seeing it.

   Which God hath ordained. Paul having said that the gospel was a hidden
   thing, there was a danger lest believers should, on hearing this, be
   appalled by the difficulty, and retire in despair. Accordingly he meets
   this danger, and declares that it had notwithstanding been appointed to
   us, that we might enjoy it. Lest any one, I say, should reckon that he
   has nothing to do with the hidden wisdom, or should imagine it to be
   unlawful to direct his eyes towards it, as not being within the reach
   of human capacity, he teaches that it has been communicated to us in
   accordance with the eternal counsel of God. At the same time he has
   something still farther in view, for by an implied comparison he extols
   that grace which has been opened up by Christ's advent, and
   distinguishes us above our fathers, who lived under the law. On this
   point I have spoken more at large in [3]the end of the last chapter of
   the Romans. First of all then he argues from what God had ordained, for
   if God has appointed nothing in vain, it follows, that we will be no
   losers by listening to the gospel which he has appointed for us, for he
   accommodates himself to our capacity in addressing us. In accordance
   with this Isaiah (Isaiah 45:19) says --

   "I have not spoken in a lurking place, or in a dark corner. [114]
   I have not in vain said to the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me."

   Secondly, with the view of rendering the gospel attractive, and
   alluring us to a desire of acquaintance with it, he draws an argument
   still farther from the design that God had in view in giving it to us
   -- "for our glory." In this expression, too, he seems to draw a
   comparison between us and the fathers, our heavenly Father not having
   vouchsafed to them that honor which he reserved for the advent of his
   Son. [115]

   8. None of the princes of this world knew If you supply the words by
   their own discernment, the statement would not be more applicable to
   them than to the generality of mankind, and the very lowest of the
   people; for what are the attainments of all of us as to this matter,
   from the greatest to the least? Only we may perhaps say, that princes,
   rather than others, are charged with blindness and ignorance -- for
   this reason, that they alone appear in the view of the word
   clear-sighted and wise. At the same time I should prefer to understand
   the expression in a more simple way, agreeably to the common usage of
   Scripture, which is wont to speak in terms of universality of those
   things that, happen epi to polu, that is commonly, and also to make a
   negative statement in terms of universality, as to those things that
   happen only epi elatton, that is very seldom In this sense there were
   nothing inconsistent with this statement, though there were found a few
   men of distinction, and elevated above others in point of dignity, who
   were at the same time endowed with the pure knowledge of God.

   For had they known The wisdom of God shone forth clearly in Christ, and
   yet there the princes did not perceive it; for those who took the lead
   in the crucifixion of Christ were on the one hand the chief men of the
   Jews, high in credit for holiness and wisdom; and on the other hand
   Pilate and the Roman empire. In this we have a most distinct proof of
   the utter blindness of all that are wise only according to the flesh.
   This argument of the Apostle, however, might appear to be weak. "What!
   do we not every day see persons who, with deliberate malice, fight
   against the truth of God, as to which they are not ignorant; nay, even
   if a rebellion so manifest were not to be seen by us with our eyes,
   what else is the sin against the Holy Ghost than a willful obstinacy
   against God, when a man knowingly and willingly does not merely oppose
   his word, but even fights against it. It is on this account, too, that
   Christ declares that the Pharisees, and others of that description,
   knew him, (John 7:28,) while he deprives them of all pretext of
   ignorance, and accuses them of impious cruelty in persecuting him, the
   faithful servant of the Father, for no other reason but that they hated
   the truth."

   I answer that there are two kinds of ignorance. The one arises from
   inconsiderate zeal, not expressly rejecting what is good, but from
   having an impression that it is evil. No one, it is true, sins in
   ignorance in such a way as not to be chargeable meanwhile in the sight
   of God with an evil conscience, there being always a mixture of
   hypocrisy, or pride, or contempt; but at the same time judgment, and
   all intelligence in the mind of man, are sometimes so effectually
   choked, that nothing but bare ignorance is to be seen by others, or
   even by the individual himself. Such was Paul before he was
   enlightened; for the reason why he hated Christ and was hostile to his
   doctrine was, that he was through ignorance hurried away with a
   preposterous zeal for the law. [116] Yet he was not devoid of
   hypocrisy, nor exempt from pride, so as to be free from blame in the
   sight of God, but those vices were so completely covered over with
   ignorance and blindness as not to be perceived or felt even by himself.

   The other kind of ignorance has more of the appearance of insanity and
   derangement, than of mere ignorance; for those that of their own accord
   rise up against God, are like persons in a frenzy, who, seeing, see
   not. (Matthew 13:13.) It must be looked upon, indeed, as a settled
   point, that infidelity is always blind; but the difference lies here,
   that in some cases malice is covered over with blindness to such a
   degree that the individual, through a kind of stupidity, is without any
   perception of his own wickedness. This is the case with those who, with
   a good intention, as they speak, or in other words, a foolish
   imagination, impose upon themselves. In some cases malice has the
   ascendancy in such a manner, that in spite of the checks of conscience,
   the individual rushes forward into wickedness of this sort with a kind
   of madness. [117] Hence it is not to be wondered, if Paul declares that
   the princes of this world would not have crucified Christ, had they
   known the wisdom of God. For the Pharisees and Scribes did not know
   Christ's doctrine to be true, so as not to be bewildered in their mind,
   and wander on in their own darkness.

   9. As it is written, "What eye hath not seen." All are agreed that this
   passage is taken from Isaiah 64:4, and as the meaning is at first view
   plain and easy, interpreters do not give themselves much trouble in
   expounding it. On looking, however, more narrowly into it, two very
   great difficulties present themselves. The first is, that the words
   that are here quoted by Paul do not correspond with the words of the
   Prophet. The second is, that it seems as though Paul had perverted the
   Prophet's declaration to a purpose quite foreign to his design.

   First then as to the words; and as they may be taken in different
   senses, they are explained variously by interpreters. Some render the
   passage thus: "From the beginning of the world men have not heard, nor
   perceived with their ears, and eye hath not seen any god beside Thee,
   who doth act in such a manner towards him that waiteth for him." Others
   understand the discourse as addressed to God, in this manner: "Eye hath
   not seen, nor hath ear heard, O God, besides thee, the things which
   thou dost for those that wait for thee." Literally, however, the
   Prophet's meaning is: "From the beginning of the world men have not
   heard, nor have they perceived with the ears, hath not seen a god, (or
   O God,) besides thee, will do (or will prepare) for him that waiteth
   for him." If we understand 'lhym (God) to be in the accusative, the
   relative who must be supplied. This exposition, too, appears, at first
   view, to suit better with the Prophet's context in respect of the verb
   that follows being used in the third person; [118] but it is farther
   removed from Paul's meaning, on which we ought to place more dependence
   than on any other consideration. For where shall we find a surer or
   more faithful interpreter than the Spirit of God of this authoritative
   declaration, which He himself dictated to Isaiah -- in the exposition
   which He has furnished by the mouth of Paul. With the view of
   obviating, however, the calumnies of the wicked, I observe that the
   Hebrew idiom admits of our understanding the Prophets true meaning to
   be this: "O God, neither hath eye seen, nor hath ear heard: but thou
   alone knowest the things which thou art wont to do to those that wait
   for thee." The sudden change of person forms no objection, as we know
   that it is so common in the writings of the Prophets, that it needs not
   be any hindrance in our way. If any one, however, prefers the former
   interpretation, he will have no occasion for charging either us or the
   Apostle with departing from the simple meaning of the words, for we
   supply less than they do, as they are under the necessity of adding a
   mark of comparison to the verb, rendering it thus: "who doth act in
   such a manner."

   As to what follows respecting the entering of these things into the
   heart of man, though the expression is not made use of by the Prophet,
   it does not differ materially from the clause besides thee For in
   ascribing this knowledge to God alone, he excludes from it not merely
   the bodily senses of men, but also the entire faculty of the
   understanding. While, therefore, the Prophet makes mention only of
   sight and hearing, he includes at the same time by implication all the
   faculties of the soul. And without doubt these are the two instruments
   by which we attain the knowledge of those things that find their way
   into the understanding. In using the expression them that love him, he
   has followed the Greek interpreters, who have translated it in this way
   from having been misled by the resemblance between one letter and
   another; [119] but as that did not affect the point in hand, he did not
   choose to depart from the common reading, as we frequently have
   occasion to observe how closely he follows the received version. Though
   the words, therefore, are not the same, there is no real difference of
   meaning.

   I come now to the subject-matter. The Prophet in that passage, when
   mentioning how signally God had on all occasions befriended his people
   in their emergencies, exclaims, that his acts of kindness to the pious
   surpass the comprehension of human intellect. "But what has this to
   do," some one will say, "with spiritual doctrine, and the promises of
   eternal life, as to which Paul is here arguing?" There are three ways
   in which this question may be answered. There were no inconsistency in
   affirming that the Prophet, having made mention of earthly blessings,
   was in consequence of this led on to make a general statement, and even
   to extol that spiritual blessedness which is laid up in heaven for
   believers. I prefer, however, to understand him simply as referring to
   those gifts of God's grace that are daily conferred upon believers. In
   these it becomes us always to observe their source, and not to confine
   our views to their present aspect. Now their source is that unmerited
   goodness of God, by which he has adopted us into the number of his
   sons. He, therefore, who would estimate these things aright, will not
   contemplate them in their naked aspect, but will clothe them with God's
   fatherly love, as with a robe, and will thus be led forward from
   temporal favors to eternal life. It might also be maintained that the
   argument is from the less to the greater; for if man's intellect is not
   competent to measure God's earthly gifts, how much less will it reach
   the height of heaven? (John 3:12.) I have, however, already intimated
   which interpretation I prefer.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [112] "Thus we read, (Genesis 25:27,) that Jacob was 'ys tm, "a perfect
   man," i.e. without any manifest blemish. See also Job 1:1, 8. The
   corresponding word tmym, is frequently applied to the sacrificial
   victims, to denote their being without blemish Exodus 12:5; Leviticus
   1:3. -- Ed

   [113] "Il ne s'en rapporte pas a vn chacvn, mais requiert des luges
   entiers;" -- "He does not submit the case to every one, but appeals to
   competent judges."

   [114] "In allusion, it is generally thought, to the deep and dark
   caverns from which the heathen oracles gave forth their responses. Such
   was the cave (antrum) of the Cumean Sibyl, described by Virgil, AEn.
   6:42-44, and also the cavern in the temple of Apollo at Delphi,
   described by Strabo (lib. 9.) "phasi d ' einai to manteion antron
   koilon meta bathous, ou mala eurostomon;" -- "They say that the oracle
   is a hollow cavern of considerable depth, but not at all wide in the
   opening." -- Ed

   [115] Locke, in accordance with Calvin's view, understands Paul as if
   he had said: "Why do you make divisions, by glorying, as you do, in
   your distinct teachers? The glory that God has ordained us (Christian
   teachers and professors) to, is to be expounders, preachers, and
   believers of those revealed truths and purposes of God, which, though
   contained in the sacred Scriptures of the Old Testament, were not
   understood in former ages." -- Ed.

   [116] "Vne zele de la loy desordonne et real regle;" -- "An inordinate
   and ill regulated zeal for the law."

   [117] The distinction drawn by Calvin is illustrated by a statement of
   Solomon in Proverbs 21:27. "The sacrifice of the wicked is abomination:
   how much more when he bringeth it with a wicked mind." vzmh -- "with a
   wicked design." -- Ed

   [118] "Assauoir, Fera, or Preparera;" -- "Namely -- He will do, or He
   will prepare."

   [119] The word made use of by Isaiah is mchkh, which is a part of the
   verb chkh, to wait for, and Calvin's meaning most probably is, that the
   "Greek interpreters had (from the resemblance between v and k) been led
   into the mistake of supposing it to be a part of the verb chvv, to
   love, while the corresponding part of the latter verb -- mchvvv,
   manifestly differs very widely from the word made use of by the
   Prophet. There appears, how ever, to have been an oversight, in this
   instance, on the part of Calvin, as the word in the Septuagint version
   is not the word made use of by the Apostle -- agaposin, "them that
   love" (him,) but (corresponding to the word made use of bythe Prophet
   hupomenousin, "them that wait for" (him.) It is not a little singular,
   that Clemens Romanus (Ep. ad Cor. Sect. 34.) quotes the words of Isaiah
   precisely as Paul quotes them, with the exception of the last clause,
   which he gives as follows: hosa hetoimase tois hupomenousin auton --
   "which he hath prepared for them that wait for him." Some have supposed
   the citation to have been taken from one or other of the two Apocryphal
   books, entitled, "The Ascension of Esaiah," and "The Apocalyps of
   Elias," in both of which this passage was found, but, as is justly
   observed by Horne in his Introduction (volume 2,) "it is so near to the
   Hebrew here both in sense and words, that we cannot suppose it to be
   taken from any other source, nor in this case would the Apostle have
   introduced it with the formula of quotation -- as it is written." In
   accordance with Calvln's remark, that "though the words are not the
   same, there is no real difference of meaning," it is well observed by
   Poole in his Annotations, that "waiting for" God is "the certain
   product and effect of love to him." -- Ed
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 2:10-13

   10. But God hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit: for the Spirit
   searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God.

   10. Nobis autem Deus revelavit per Spiritum suum: Spiritus enim omnia
   scrutatur, etiam profunditates Dei.

   11. For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man
   which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the
   Spirit of God.

   11. Quis enim hominum novit, quae ad eum pertinent, nisi spiritus
   hominis, qui est in ipso? Ita et quae Dei sunt, nemo novit, nisi
   Spiritus Dei.

   12. Now we have received, not the spirit of the world, but the spirit
   which is of God; that we might know the things that are freely given to
   us of God.

   12. Nos autem non spiritum mundi accepimus, seal Spiritum qui est ex
   Deo: ut sciamus quae a Christo donata sunt nobis:

   13. Which things also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom
   teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost teacheth; comparing spiritual things
   with spiritual.

   13. Quae et loquimur, non in eruditis humanae sapientiae sermonibus,
   sed Spiritus sancti, spiritualibus spiritualia coaptantes.


   10. But God hath revealed them to us. Having shut up all mankind in
   blindness, and having taken away from the human intellect the power of
   attaining to a knowledge of God by its own resources, he now shows in
   what way believers are exempted from this blindness, -- by the Lord's
   honoring them with a special illumination of the Spirit. Hence the
   greater the bluntness of the human intellect for understanding the
   mysteries of God, and the greater the uncertainty under which it
   labors, so much the surer is our faith, which rests for its support on
   the revelation of God's Spirit. In this, too, we recognize the
   unbounded goodness of God, who makes our defect contribute to our
   advantage.

   For the Spirit searcheth all things This is added for the consolation
   of the pious, that they may rest more securely in the revelation which
   they have from the Spirit of God, as though he had said. "Let it
   suffice us to have the Spirit of God as a witness, for there is nothing
   in God that is too profound for him to reach." For such is the import
   here of the word searcheth By the deep things you must understand --
   not secret judgments, which we are forbidden to search into, but the
   entire doctrine of salvation, which would have been to no purpose set
   before us in the Scriptures, were it not that God elevates our minds to
   it by his Spirit.

   11. For what man knoweth? Two different things he intends to teach
   here: first, that the doctrine of the Gospel cannot be understood
   otherwise than by the testimony of the Holy Spirit; and secondly, that
   those who have a testimony of this nature from the Holy Spirit, have an
   assurance as firm and solid, as if they felt with their hands what they
   believe, for the Spirit is a faithful and indubitable witness. This he
   proves by a similitude drawn from our own spirit: for every one is
   conscious of his own thoughts, and on the other hand what lies hid in
   any man's heart, is unknown to another. In the same way what is the
   counsel of God, and what his will, is hid from all mankind, for "who
   hath been his counselor?" (Romans 11:34.) It is, therefore, a secret
   recess, inaccessible to mankind; but, if the Spirit of God himself
   introduces us into it, or in other words, makes us acquainted with
   those things that are otherwise hid from our view, there will then be
   no more ground for hesitation, for nothing that is in God escapes the
   notice of the Spirit of God.

   This similitude, however, may seem to be not altogether very
   appropriate, for as the tongue bears an impress of the mind, mankind
   communicate their dispositions to each other, so that they become
   acquainted with each other's thoughts. Why then may we not understand
   from the word of God what is his will? For while mankind by pretenses
   and falsehoods in many cases conceal their thoughts rather than
   discover them, this cannot happen with God, whose word is undoubted
   truth, and his genuine and lively image. We must, however, carefully
   observe how far Paul designed to extend this comparison. A man's
   innermost thought, of which others are ignorant, is perceived by
   himself alone: if he afterwards makes it known to others, this does not
   hinder but that his spirit alone knows what is in him. For it may
   happen that he does not persuade: it may even happen that he does not
   properly express his own meaning; but even if he attains both objects,
   this statement is not at variance with the other -- that his own spirit
   alone has the true knowledge of it. There is this difference, however,
   between God's thoughts and those of men, that men mutually understand
   each other; but the word of God is a kind of hidden wisdom, the
   loftiness of which is not reached by the weakness of the human
   intellect. Thus the light shineth in darkness, (John 1:5,) aye and
   until the Spirit opens the eyes of the blind.

   The spirit of a man Observe, that the spirit of a man is taken here for
   the soul, in which the intellectual faculty, as it is called, resides.
   For Paul would have expressed himself inaccurately if he had ascribed
   this knowledge to man's intellect, or in other words, the faculty
   itself, and not to the soul, which is endued with the power of
   understanding.

   12. Now we have received, not the spirit of the world He heightens by
   contrast the certainty of which he had made mention. "The Spirit of
   revelation," says he, "which we have received, is not of the world, so
   as to be merely creeping upon the ground, so as to be subject to
   vanity, or be in suspense, or vary or fluctuate, or hold us in doubt
   and perplexity. On the contrary, it is from God, and hence it is above
   all heavens, of solid and unvarying truth, and placed above all risk of
   doubt."

   It is a passage that is most abundantly clear, for refuting that
   diabolical doctrine of the Sophists as to a constant hesitancy on the
   part of believers. For they require all believers to be in doubt,
   whether they are in the grace of God or not, and allow of no assurance
   of salvation, but what hangs on moral or probable conjecture. In this,
   however, they overthrow faith in two respects: for first they would
   have us be in doubt, whether we are in a state of grace, and then
   afterwards they suggest a second occasion of doubt -- as to final
   perseverance. [120] Here, however, the Apostle declares in general
   terms, that the elect have the Spirit given them, by whose testimony
   they are assured that they have been adopted to the hope of eternal
   salvation. Undoubtedly, if they would maintain their doctrine, they
   must of necessity either take away the Spirit of God from the elect, or
   make even the Spirit himself subject to uncertainty. Both of these
   things are openly at variance with Paul's doctrine. Hence we may know
   the nature of faith to be this, that conscience has from the Holy
   Spirit a sure testimony of the good-will of God towards it, so that,
   resting upon this, it does not hesitate to invoke God as a Father. Thus
   Paul lifts up our faith above the world, that it may look down with
   lofty disdain upon all the pride of the flesh; for otherwise it will be
   always timid and wavering, because we see how boldly human ingenuity
   exalts itself, the haughtiness of which requires to be trodden under
   foot by the sons of God through means of an opposing haughtiness of
   heroical magnanimity. [121]

   That we may know the things that are given us by Christ. The word know
   is made use of to express more fully the assurance of confidence. Let
   us observe, however, that it is not acquired in a natural way, and is
   not attained by the mental capacity, but depends entirely on the
   revelation of the Spirit. The things that he makes mention of as given
   by Christ are the blessings that we obtain through his death and
   resurrection -- that being reconciled to God, and having obtained
   remission of sins, we know that we have been adopted to the hope of
   eternal life, and that, being sanctified by the Spirit of regeneration,
   we are made new creatures, that we may live to God. In Ephesians 1:18,
   he says what amounts to the same thing --

   "That ye may know what is the hope of your calling."

   13. Which things also we speak, not in the learned words, etc. He
   speaks of himself, for he is still employed in commending his ministry.
   Now it is a high commendation that he pronounces upon his preaching,
   when he says of it that it contains a secret revelation of the most
   important matters -- the doctrine of the Holy Spirit, the sum of our
   salvation, and the inestimable treasures of Christ, that the
   Corinthians may know how highly it ought to be prized. In the meantime
   he returns to the concession that he had made before -- that his
   preaching had not been adorned with any glitter of words, and had no
   luster of elegance, but was contented with the simple doctrine of the
   Holy Spirit. By the learned words of human wisdom [122] he means those
   that savor of human learning, and are polished according to the rules
   of the rhetoricians, or blown up with philosophical loftiness, with a
   view to excite the admiration of the hearers. The words taught by the
   Spirit, on the other hand, are such as are adapted to a pure and simple
   style, corresponding to the dignity of the Spirit, rather than to an
   empty ostentation. For in order that eloquence may not be wanting, we
   must always take care that the wisdom of God be not polluted with any
   borrowed and profane luster. Paul's manner of teaching was of such a
   kind, that the power of the Spirit shone forth in it single and
   unattired, without any foreign aid.

   Spiritual things with spiritual Sunkrinesthai is used here, I have no
   doubt, in the sense of adapt This is sometimes the meaning of the word,
   [123] (as Budaeus shows by a quotation from Aristotle) and hence
   sunkrima is used to mean what is knit together or glued together, and
   certainly it suits much better with Paul's context than compare or
   liken, as others have rendered it. He says then that he adapts
   spiritual things to spiritual, in accommodating the words to the
   subject; [124] that is, he tempers that heavenly wisdom of the Spirit
   with a simple style of speech, and of such a nature as carries in its
   front the native energy of the Spirit. In the meantime he reproves
   others, who, by an affected elegance of expression and show of
   refinement, endeavor to obtain the applause of men, as persons who are
   either devoid of solid truth, or, by unbecoming ornaments, corrupt the
   spiritual doctrine of God.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [120] The reader will find this subject treated of at greater length in
   the Institutes, volume 2, p. 143. -- Ed.

   [121] "Fondee en vne magnanimite heroique;" -- "Founded upon a heroical
   magnanimity."

   [122] "A similar rendering is given in some of the old English versions
   of the Scriptures. Thus, Wiclif's version, (1380,) it is rendered "not
   in wise wordis of mannes wisdom:" in Tyndale's version (1534) -- "not
   in the connynge wordes of mannes wysdome: and in Rhemls version (1582)
   -- "not in learned wordes of humane wisedom." -- Ed.

   [123] "Es bons autheurs;" -- "In good authors."

   [124] Beza's view is substantially the same -- "Verba rei
   accommodantes, ut, sicut spiritualia sunt quae docemus, neque
   sinceritas doctrinae caelestis ullis humanis commentis est depravata,
   ita spirituale sit nostrum illius docendae ghenus: -- "Accommodating
   the words to the subject, so that as the things at we teach are
   spiritual, and the purity of heavenly doctrine is not corrupted by
   human contrivances, our mode of teaching it may in like manner be
   spiritual." -- Ed.
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 2:14-16

   14. But the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God:
   for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because
   they are spiritually discerned.

   14. Animalis autem homo non comprehendit quae sunt Spiritus Dei. Sunt
   enim illi stultitia; nec potest intelligere, quia spiritualiter
   diiudicantur.

   15. But he that is spiritual judgeth all things, yet himself is judged
   of no man.

   15. Spiritualis autem diiudicat omnia, ipsc vero a neminc (vel, nullo)
   diiudicatur.

   16. For who hath known the mind of the Lord, that he may instruct him?
   But we have the mind of Christ.

   16. Quis enim cognovit mentem Domini, qui adjuvet ipsum? nos autem
   mentem Christi habemus.


   14. But the animal man. [125] By the animal man he does not mean (as is
   commonly thought) the man that is given up to gross lusts, or, as they
   say, to his own sensuality, but any man that is endowed with nothing
   more than the faculties [126] of nature. [127] This appears from the
   corresponding term, for he draws a comparison between the animal man
   and the spiritual As the latter denotes the man whose understanding is
   regulated by the illumination of the Spirit of God, there can be no
   doubt that the former denotes the man that is left in a purely natural
   condition, as they speak. For the soul [128] belongs to nature, but the
   Spirit is of supernatural communication.

   He returns to what he had previously touched upon, for his object is to
   remove a stumblingblock which might stand in the way of the weak --
   that there were so many that despised the gospel. He shows that we
   ought to make no account of a contempt of such a nature as proceeds
   from ignorance, and that it ought, consequently, to be no hindrance in
   the way of our going forward in the race of faith, unless perhaps we
   choose to shut our eyes upon the brightness of the sun, because it is
   not seen by the blind. It would, however, argue great ingratitude in
   any individual, when God bestows upon him a special favor, to reject
   it, on the ground of its not being common to all, whereas, on the
   contrary, its very rareness ought to enhance its value. [129]

   For they are foolishness to him, neither can he know them. "The
   doctrine of the gospel," says he, "is insipid [130] in the view of all
   that are wise merely in the view of man. But whence comes this? It is
   from their own blindness. In what respect, then, does this detract from
   the majesty of the gospel?" In short, while ignorant persons depreciate
   the gospel, because they measure its value by the estimation in which
   it is held by men, Paul derives an argument from this for extolling
   more highly its dignity. For he teaches that the reason why it is
   contemned is that it is unknown, and that the reason why it is unknown
   is that it is too profound and sublime to be apprehended by the
   understanding of man. What a superior wisdom [131] this is, which so
   far transcends all human understanding, that man cannot have so much as
   a taste of it! [132] While, however, Paul here tacitly imputes it to
   the pride of the flesh, that mankind dare to condemn as foolish what
   they do not comprehend, he at the same time shows how great is the
   weakness or rather bluntness of the human understanding, when he
   declares it to be incapable of spiritual apprehension. For he teaches,
   that it is not owing simply to the obstinacy of the human will, but to
   the impotency, also, of the understanding, that man does not attain to
   the things of the Spirit. Had he said that men are not willing to be
   wise, that indeed would have been true, but he states farther that they
   are not able. Hence we infer, that faith is not in one's own power, but
   is divinely conferred.

   Because they are spiritually discerned That is, the Spirit of God, from
   whom the doctrine of the gospel comes, is its only true interpreter, to
   open it up to us. Hence in judging of it, men's minds must of necessity
   be in blindness until they are enlightened by the Spirit of God. [133]
   Hence infer, that all mankind are by nature destitute of the Spirit of
   God: otherwise the argument would be inconclusive. It is from the
   Spirit of God, it is true, that we have that feeble spark of reason
   which we all enjoy; but at present we are speaking of that special
   discovery of heavenly wisdom which God vouchsafes to his sons alone.
   Hence the more insufferable the ignorance of those who imagine that the
   gospel is offered to mankind in common in such a way that all
   indiscriminately are free [134] to embrace salvation by faith.

   15. But the spiritual man judgeth all things. Having stripped of all
   authority man's carnal judgment, he now teaches, that the spiritual
   alone are fit judges as to this matter, inasmuch as God is known only
   by his Spirit, and it is his peculiar province to distinguish between
   his own things and those of others, to approve of what is his own, and
   to make void all things else. The meaning, then, is this: "Away with
   all the discernment of the flesh as to this matter! It is the spiritual
   man alone that has such a firm and solid acquaintance with the
   mysteries of God, as to distinguish without fail between truth and
   falsehood -- between the doctrine of God and the contrivances of man,
   so as not to fall into mistake. [135] He, on the other hand, is judged
   by no man, because the assurance of faith is not subject to men, as
   though they could make it totter at their nod, [136] it being superior
   even to angels themselves." Observe, that this prerogative is not
   ascribed to the man as an individual, but to the word of God, which the
   spiritual follow in judging, and which is truly dictated to them by God
   with true discernment. Where that is afforded, a man's persuasion [137]
   is placed beyond the range of human judgment. Observe, farther, the
   word rendered judged: by which the Apostle intimates, that we are not
   merely enlightened by the Lord to perceive the truth, but are also
   endowed with a spirit of discrimination, so as not to hang in doubt
   between truth and falsehood, but are able to determine what we ought to
   shun and what to follow.

   But here it may be asked, who is the spiritual man, and where we may
   find one that is endowed with so much light as to be prepared to judge
   of all things, feeling as we do, that we are at all times encompassed
   with much ignorance, and are in danger of erring: nay more, even those
   who come nearest to perfection from time to time fall and bruise
   themselves. The answer is easy: Paul does not extend this faculty to
   everything, so as to represent all that are renewed by the Spirit of
   God as exempt from every kind of error, but simply designs to teach,
   that the wisdom of the flesh is of no avail for judging of the doctrine
   of piety, and that this right of judgment and authority belong
   exclusively to the Spirit of God. In so far, therefore, as any one is
   regenerated, and according to the measure of grace conferred upon him,
   does he judge with accuracy and certainty, and no farther.

   He himself is judged by no man. I have already explained on what ground
   he says that the spiritual man is not subject to the judgment of any
   man -- because the truth of faith, which depends on God alone, and is
   grounded on his word, does not stand or fall according to the pleasure
   of men. [138] What he says afterwards, that

   the spirit of one Prophet is subject to the other Prophets,
   (1 Corinthians 14:32,)

   is not at all inconsistent with this statement. For what is the design
   of that subjection, but that each of the Prophets listens to the
   others, and does not despise or reject their revelations, in order that
   what is discovered to be the truth of God, [139] may at length remain
   firm, and be received by all? Here, however, he places the science of
   faith, which has been received from God, [140] above the height of
   heaven and earth, in order that it may not be estimated by the judgment
   of men. At the same time, hup ' oudenos may be taken in the neuter
   gender as meaning -- by nothing, understanding it as referring to a
   thing, and not to a man. In this way the contrast will be more
   complete, [141] as intimating that the spiritual man, in so far as he
   is endowed with the Spirit of God, judgeth all things, but is judged by
   nothing, because he is not subject to any human wisdom or reason. In
   this way, too, Paul would exempt the consciences of the pious from all
   decrees, laws, and censures of men.

   16. For who hath known? It is probable that Paul had an eye to what we
   read in the 40th chapter of Isaiah. The Prophet there asks,

   Who hath been God's counselor? Who hath weighed his Spirit, [142]
   (Isaiah 40:13,)

   or hath aided him both in the creation of the world and in his other
   works? and, in fine, who hath comprehended the reason of his works?
   Now, in like manner Paul, by this interrogation, designs to teach, that
   his secret counsel which is contained in the gospel is far removed from
   the understanding of men. This then is a confirmation of the preceding
   statement.

   But we have the mind of Christ. It is uncertain whether he speaks of
   believers universally, or of ministers exclusively. Either of these
   meanings will suit sufficiently well with the context, though I prefer
   to view it as referring more particularly to himself and other faithful
   ministers. [143] He says, then, that the servants of the Lord are
   taught by the paramount authority of the Spirit, what is farthest
   removed from the judgment of the flesh, that they may speak fearlessly
   as from the mouth of the Lord, -- which gift flows out afterwards by
   degrees to the whole Church.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [125] "Or l'homme naturel. A le traduire du Grec mot a mot, il y auroit
   l'homme animal;" -- "But the natural man. Rendering the Greek literally
   it means the animal man."

   [126] "Les facultes et graces;" -- "The faculties and gifts."

   [127] Beza's definition of the term is much similar -- "Homo non alia
   quam naturali animi luce praeditus;" -- "A man that is not endowed with
   anything more than the natural light of the mind." -- Ed.

   [128] "Anima" "the soul" corresponds to the Greek term psuche, and the
   Hebrew term nphs, while spiritus (spirit) corresponds to pneuma and
   rvch; but Calvin employs the epithet animalis (animal) as a derivative
   from anima, (the soul,) and as designating the man whose soul is in a
   purely natural state -- without supernatural illumination -- in other
   words, the man of mere mind. -- Ed

   [129] "D'autant qu'il est fait a peu de gens, d'autant doit-il estre
   trouue plus excellent;" -- "The fewer it is conferred upon, it ought to
   be accounted so much the more valuable."

   [130] "Et n'auoir point de goust;" -- "And has no relish."

   [131] "O quelle sagesse!" -- "O what wisdom!"

   [132] "Vn petit goust;" -- "A slight taste."

   [133] "The reader will find the Apostle's statement respecting the
   "natural man" commented upon at some length in the Institutes, volume
   1. -- Ed.

   [134] Calvin obviously does not mean to deny that "all
   indiscriminately" are invited and warranted to "embrace salvation by
   faith." He says in the Harmony, volume 3, "For since by his word he
   [God] calls all men indiscriminately to salvation, and since the end of
   preaching is, that all should betake themselves to his guardianship and
   protection, it may justly be said that he wills to gather all to
   himself." His meaning is, that the will requires to be set free by the
   Spirit of God. -- Ed.

   [135] "En cest endroit" -- "In this matter."

   [136] "Pour estre ou n'estre point selon qu'il leur plaira;" -- "So as
   to be or not to be, according as it shall please them."

   [137] "Et foy;" -- "And faith."

   [138] "N'est point suiete au plaisir des hommes, pour estre ou n'estre
   point, selon qu'ils voudront;" -- "It is not subject to the pleasure of
   men, so as to be, or not to be, according as they shall choose."

   [139] "La pure verite du Seigneur;" -- "The pure truth of the Lord."

   [140] "Mais yci il establit et conferme la science de roy, laquelle les
   eleus recoyuent de Dieu;" -- "But here he establishes and confirms the
   science of faith, which the elect have received from God."

   [141] "Et expresse;" -- "And exact."

   [142] The expression made use of by Isaiah is, Who hath directed the
   Spirit of the Lord? Our author, quoting from memory, seems to have had
   in his eye an expression that occurs in a preceding part of the same
   passage, "and weighed the mountains in scales." -- Ed.

   [143] Calvin, when alluding to this passage, as he evidently does in
   his Commentary on Romans 11:34, views the expression, We have the mind
   of Christ, as applicable to believers universally -- "Nam et Paulus
   ipso alibi, postquam testatus erat onmia Dei mysteria ingenii nostri
   captum longe excedere, mox tamen subjicit, fideles tenere mentem
   Domini: quia non spiritum hujus mundi acceperint, sed a Deo sibi datum,
   per quem de incomprehensibili alioqui ejus bonitate edocentur;" -- "For
   even Paul himself, in another place, after testifying that all the
   mysteries of God far exceed the capacity of our understanding, does
   nevertheless immediately add, that believers are in possession of the
   Lord's mind, because they have received not the spirit of this world,
   but that which has been given them by God, whereby they are instructed
   as to his otherwise incomprehensible goodness." -- Ed.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 3
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 3:1-4

   1. And I, brethren, could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but as
   unto carnal, even as unto babes in Christ.

   1. Et ego, fratres, non potui vobis loqui tanquam spiritualibus, sed
   tanquam carnalibus, tanquam pueris in Christo. [144]

   2. I have fed you with milk, and not with meat: for hitherto ye were
   not able to bear it, neither yet now are ye able.

   2. Lactis potu vos alui, non solido cibo. Nondum enim eratis capaces,
   ac ne nunc quidem estis:

   3. For ye are yet carnal: for whereas there is among you envying, and
   strife, and divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk as men?

   3. Siquidem estis adhuc carnales. Postquam enim sunt inter vos
   aemulatio et contentio, et factioncs; nonne carnales estis, et secundum
   hominem ambulatis?

   4. For while one saith, I am of Paul; and another, I am of Apollos; are
   ye not carnal?

   4. Quum enim dicat unus, Ego sum Pauli: alter vero, Ego Apollo: nonne
   carnales estis?


   1. And I, brethren He begins to apply to the Corinthians themselves,
   that he had said respecting carnal persons, that they may understand
   that the fault was their own -- that the doctrine of the Cross had not
   more charms for them. It is probable, that in mercantile minds like
   theirs there was too much confidence and arrogance still lingering, so
   that it was not without much ado and great difficulty that they could
   bring themselves to embrace the simplicity of the gospel. Hence it was,
   that undervaluing the Apostle, and the divine efficacy of his
   preaching, they were more prepared to listen to those teachers that
   were subtle and showy, while destitute of the Spirit. [145] Hence, with
   the view of beating down so much the better their insolence, he
   declares, that they belong to the company of those who, stupefied by
   carnal sense, are not prepared to receive the spiritual wisdom of God.
   He softens down, it is true, the harshness of his reproach by calling
   them brethren, but at the same time he brings it forward expressly as a
   matter of reproach against them, that their minds were suffocated with
   the darkness of the flesh to such a degree that it formed a hindrance
   to his preaching among them. What sort of sound judgment then must they
   have, when they are not fit and prepared as yet even for hearing! He
   does not mean, however, that they were altogether carnal, so as to have
   not one spark of the Spirit of God -- but that they had still greatly
   too much of carnal sense, so that the flesh prevailed over the Spirit,
   and did as it were drown out his light. Hence, although they were not
   altogether destitute of grace, yet, as they had more of the flesh than
   of the Spirit, they are on that account termed carnal This sufficiently
   appears from what he immediately adds -- that they were babes in
   Christ; for they would not have been babes had they not been begotten,
   and that begetting is from the Spirit of God.

   Babes in Christ This term is sometimes taken in a good sense, as it is
   by Peter, who exhorts us to be like new-born babes, (1 Peter 2:2,) and
   in that saying of Christ,

   Unless ye become as these little children,
   ye shall not enter into the kingdom of God, (Luke 18:17.)

   Here, however, it is taken in a bad sense, as referring to the
   understanding. For we must be children in malice, but not in
   understanding, as he says afterwards in 1 Corinthians 14:20, -- a
   distinction which removes all occasion of doubt as to the meaning. To
   this also there is a corresponding passage in Ephesians 4:14.

   That we be no longer children tossed to and fro with every wind of
   doctrine, and made the sport [146] of human fallacies, but may day by
   day grow up, etc

   2. I have fed you with milk Here it is asked, whether Paul transformed
   Christ to suit the diversity of his hearers. I answer, that this refers
   to the manner and form of his instructions, rather than to the
   substance of the doctrine. For Christ is at once milk to babes, and
   strong meat to those that are of full age, (Hebrews 5:13, 14,) the same
   truth of the gospel is administered to both, but so as to suit their
   capacity. Hence it is the part of a wise teacher to accommodate himself
   to the capacity of those whom he has undertaken to instruct, so that in
   dealing with the weak and ignorant, he begins with first principles,
   and does not go higher than they are able to follow, (Mark 4:33,) and
   so that, in short, he drops in his instructions by little and little,
   [147] lest it should run over, if poured in more abundantly. At the
   same time, those first principles will contain everything necessary to
   be known, no less than the farther advanced lessons that are
   communicated to those that are stronger. On this point read Augustine's
   98th homily on John. This tends to refute the specious pretext of some,
   who, while they do but mutter out, from fear of danger, something of
   the gospel in an indistinct manner, [148] pretend to have Paul's
   example here. Meanwhile, they present Christ at such a distance, and
   covered over, besides, with so many disguises, that they constantly
   keep their followers in destructive ignorance. I shall say nothing of
   their mixing up many corruptions, their presenting Christ not simply in
   half, but torn to fragments, [149] their not merely concealing such
   gross idolatry, but confirming it also by their own example, and, if
   they have said anything that is good, straightway polluting it with
   numerous falsehoods. How unlike they are to Paul is sufficiently
   manifest; for milk is nourishment and not poison, and nourishment that
   is suitable and useful for bringing up children until they are farther
   advanced.

   For ye were not yet able to bear it That they may not flatter
   themselves too much on their own discernment, he first of all tells
   them what he had found among them at the beginning, and then adds, what
   is still more severe, that the same faults remain among them to this
   day. For they ought at least, in putting on Christ, to have put off the
   flesh; and thus we see that Paul complains that the success which his
   doctrine ought to have had was impeded. For if the hearer does not
   occasion delay by his slowness, it is the part of a good teacher to be
   always going up higher, [150] till perfection has been attained.

   3. For ye are as yet carnal So long as the flesh, that is to say,
   natural corruption, prevails in a man, it has so completely possession
   of the man's mind, that the wisdom of God finds no admittance. Hence,
   if we would make proficiency in the Lord's school, we must first of all
   renounce our own judgment and our own will. Now, although among the
   Corinthians some sparks of piety were emitted, they were kept under by
   being choked. [151]

   For since there are among you. The proof is derived from the effects;
   for as envying, and strifes, and divisions, are the fruits of the
   flesh, wherever they are seen, it is certain that the root is there in
   its rigor. Those evils prevailed among the Corinthians; and accordingly
   he proves from this that they are carnal He makes use of the same
   argument, too, in Galatians 5:25 If ye live in the Spirit, walk also in
   the Spirit For while they were desirous to be regarded as spiritual, he
   calls them to look at their works, by which they denied what with their
   mouth they professed (Titus 1:16.) Observe, however, the elegant
   arrangement that Paul here pursues: for from envying spring up
   contentions, and these, when they have once been enkindled, break out
   into deadly sects: but the mother of all these evils is ambition.

   Walk as men From this it is manifest that the term flesh is not
   restricted to the lower appetites merely, as the Sophists pretend, the
   seat of which they call sensuality, but is employed to describe man's
   whole nature. For those that follow the guidance of nature, are not
   governed by the Spirit of God. These, according to the Apostle's
   definition, are carnal, so that the flesh and man's natural disposition
   are quite synonymous, and hence it is not without good reason that he
   elsewhere requires that we be new creatures in Christ (2 Corinthians
   5:17.)

   4. For while one saith He now specifies the particular kind of
   contentions, [152] and he does this by personating the Corinthians,
   that his description may have more force -- that each one gloried in
   his particular master, as though Christ were not the one Master of all
   (Matthew 23:8.) Now, where such ambition still prevails, the gospel has
   little or no success. You are not, however, to understand that they
   declared this openly in express words, but the Apostle reproves those
   depraved dispositions to which they were given up. At the same time it
   is likely, that, as a predilection arising from ambition is usually
   accompanied with an empty talkativeness, [153] they openly discovered
   by their words the absurd bias of their mind, by extolling their
   teachers to the skies in magnificent terms, accompanying this at the
   same time with contempt of Paul and those like him.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [144] "C'est a dire comme a enfans en Christ;" -- "That is to say, as
   to babes in Christ."

   [145] "Combien qu'il n'y eust en eux ancunc efficace de l'Esprit;" --
   "Though there was in them no efficacy of the Spirit."

   [146] Our author gives in this, as in many other instances, the
   substance of the passage quoted rather than the express words In the
   expression "made the sport of human fallacies," he seems to have had in
   his eye the term kubeia -- rendered by our translators sleight (of
   men,) which, as Calvin himself remarks when commenting upon the
   passage, is "translatum ab aleatoribus, quod inter eos multae sint
   fallendi artes:" borrowed from players at dice, there being many arts
   of deception practiced among them. -- Ed

   [147] "Il leur propose la doctrine petit a petit, et par maniere de
   dire, la face distiller en eux;" -- "He presents instruction to them by
   little and little, and, so to speak, makes it drop upon them."

   [148] "Ne parlans de l'Euangile que quelques mots bleu obscurement, et
   comme entre les deurs, pour la crainte qu'ils ont de tomber en quelque
   danger de leurs ersonnes;" -- "Speaking merely some words of the gospel
   very indistinctly, and, as it were, through their teeth, from the fear
   that they have of incurring some personal danger."

   [149] "Par pieces et morceaux;" -- "Into pieces and morsels."

   [150] "D'avaneer tousiours ses escholiers, et monter plus haut;" -- "To
   be always carrying forward his pupils, and going up higher."

   [151] "L'estouffement touteffois venant de leurs affections perverses,
   surmontoit;" -- "The suffocation, nevertheless, proceeding from their
   perverse affections, prevailed."

   [152] "Qui estoyent entr'eux;" -- "Which were among them."

   [153] "Cette ration de jetter son coeur sur un homme par ambition, est
   accompagnee d'un sot babil;" -- "This way of setting one's heart upon
   an individual through ambition, is accompanied with a foolish
   talkativeness."
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 3:5-9

   5. Who then is Paul, and who is Apollos, but ministers by whom ye
   believed, even as the Lord gave to every man?

   5. Quis ergo est Paulus, aut quis Apollos, nisi ministri, per quos
   credidistis, et sicut unicuique Dominus every dedit?

   6. I have planted, Apollos watered; but God gave the increase.

   6. Ego plantavi, Apollos rigavit; at Deus incrementum dedit.

   7. So then neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that
   watereth; but God that giveth the increase.

   7. Ergo neque qui plantat aliquid est, neque qui rigat; sed Deus qui
   dat incrementurn.

   8. Now he that planteth and he that watereth are one: and every man
   shall receive his own reward according to his own labor.

   8. Qui autem plantat, et qui rigat, unum [154] sunt. Porro quisque
   propriam mercedem secundum laborem suum recipiet.

   9. For we are laborers together with God: ye are God's husbandry, ye
   are God's building.

   9. Dei enim cooperarii sumus, [155] Dei agricultura, Dei aedificatio
   estis.


   5. Who then is Paul? Here he begins to treat of the estimation in which
   ministers ought to be held, and the purpose for which they have been
   set apart by the Lord. He names himself and Apollos rather than others,
   that he may avoid any appearance of envy. [156] "What else," says he,
   "are all ministers appointed for, but to bring you to faith through
   means of their preaching?" From this Paul infers, that no man ought to
   be gloried in, for faith allows of no glorying except in Christ alone.
   Hence those that extol men above measure, strip them of their true
   dignity. For the grand distinction of them all is, that they are
   ministers of faith, or, in other words, that they gain disciples to
   Christ, not to themselves. Now, though he appears in this way to
   depreciate the dignity of ministers, yet he does not assign it a lower
   place than it ought to hold. For he says much when he says, that we
   receive faith through their ministry. Nay farther, the efficacy of
   external doctrine receives here extraordinary commendation, when it is
   spoken of as the instrument of the Holy Spirit; and pastors are honored
   with no common title of distinction, when God is said to make use of
   them as his ministers, for dispensing the inestimable treasure of
   faith.

   As the Lord hath given to every man. In the Greek words used by Paul
   the particle of comparison hos, as, is placed after hekasto -- to every
   man; but the order is inverted. [157] Hence to make the meaning more
   apparent, I have rendered it "Sicut unicuique," -- "as to every man,"
   rather than "Unicuique sicut," -- "to every man as." In some
   manuscripts, however, the particle kai, and, is wanting, and it is all
   in one connection, thus: Ministers by whom ye believed as the Lord gave
   to every man If we read it in this way, the latter clause will be added
   to explain the former, -- so that Paul explains what he meant by the
   term minister: "Those are ministers whose services God makes use of,
   not as though they could do anything by their own efforts, but in so
   far as they are guided by his hand, as instruments." The rendering that
   I have given, however, is, in my opinion, the more correct one. If we
   adopt it, the statement will be more complete, for it will consist of
   two clauses, in this way. In the first place, those are ministers who
   have devoted their services to Christ, that you might believe in him:
   farther, they have nothing of their own to pride themselves upon,
   inasmuch as they do nothing of themselves, and have no power to do
   anything otherwise than by the gift of God, and every man according to
   his own measure -- which shows, that whatever each individual has, is
   derived from another. In fine, he unites them all together as by a
   mutual bond, inasmuch as they require each other's assistance.

   6. I have planted, Apollos watered He unfolds more clearly the nature
   of that ministry by a similitude, in which the nature of the word and
   the use of preaching are most appropriately depicted. That the earth
   may bring forth fruit, there is need of ploughing and sowing, and other
   means of culture; but after all this has been carefully done, the
   husbandman's labor would be of no avail, did not the Lord from heaven
   give the increase, by the breaking forth of the sun, and still more by
   his wonderful and secret influence. Hence, although the diligence of
   the husbandman is not in vain, nor the seed that he throws in useless,
   yet it is only by the blessing of God that they are made to prosper,
   for what is more wonderful than that the seed, after it has rotted,
   springs up again! In like manner, the word of the Lord is seed that is
   in its own nature fruitful: ministers are as it were husbandmen, that
   plough and sow. Then follow other helps, as for example, irrigation.
   Ministers, too, act a corresponding part when, after casting the seed
   into the ground, they give help to the earth as much as is in their
   power, until it bring forth what it has conceived: but as for making
   their labor actually productive, that is a miracle of divine grace --
   not a work of human industry.

   Observe, however, in this passage, how necessary the preaching of the
   word is, and how necessary the continuance of it. [158] It were,
   undoubtedly, as easy a thing for God to bless the earth without
   diligence on the part of men, so as to make it bring forth fruit of its
   own accord, as to draw out, or rather press out [159] its increase, at
   the expense of much assiduity on the part of men, and much sweat and
   sorrow; but as the Lord hath so ordained (1 Corinthians 9:14) that man
   should labor, and that the earth, on its part, yield a return to his
   culture, let us take care to act accordingly. In like manner, it were
   perfectly in the power of God, without the aid of men, if it so pleased
   him, to produce faith in persons while asleep; but he has appointed it
   otherwise, so that faith is produced by hearing. (Romans 10:17.) That
   man, then, who, in the neglect of this means, expects to attain faith,
   acts just as if the husbandman, throwing aside the plough, taking no
   care to sow; and leaving off all the labor of husbandry, were to open
   his mouth, expecting food to drop into it from heaven.

   As to continuance [160] we see what Paul says here -- that it is not
   enough that the seed be sown, if it is not brought forward from time to
   time by new helps. He, then, who has already received the seed, has
   still need of watering, nor must endeavors be left off, until full
   maturity has been attained, or in other words, till life is ended.
   Apollos, then, who succeeded Paul in the ministry of the word at
   Corinth, is said to have watered what he had sown.

   7. Neither is he that planteth anything It appears, nevertheless, from
   what has been already said, that their labor is of some importance. We
   must observe, therefore, why it is that Paul thus depreciates it; and
   first of all, it is proper to notice that he is accustomed to speak in
   two different ways of ministers, [161] as well as of sacraments. For in
   some cases he views a minister as one that has been set apart by the
   Lord for, in the first instance, regenerating souls, and, afterwards,
   nourishing them up unto eternal life, for remitting sins, (John 20:23,)
   for renewing the minds of men, for raising up the kingdom of Christ,
   and destroying that of Satan. Viewed in that aspect he does not merely
   assign to him the duty of planting and watering, but furnishes him,
   besides, with the efficacy of the Holy Spirit, that his labor may not
   be in vain. Thus [162] in another passage he calls himself a minister
   of the Spirit, and not of the letter, inasmuch as he writes the word of
   the Lord on men's hearts. (2 Corinthians 3:6.)

   In other cases he views a minister as one that is a servant, not a
   master -- an instrument, not the hand; and in short as man, not God.
   Viewed in that aspect, he leaves him nothing but his labor, and that,
   too, dead and powerless, if the Lord does not make it efficacious by
   his Spirit. The reason is, that when it is simply the ministry that is
   treated of, we must have an eye not merely to man, but also to God,
   working in him by the grace of the Spirit -- not as though the grace of
   the Spirit were invariably tied to the word of man, but because Christ
   puts forth his power in the ministry which he has instituted, in such a
   manner that it is made evident, that it was not instituted in vain. In
   this manner he does not take away or diminish anything that belongs to
   Him, with the view of transferring it to man. For He is not separated
   from the minister, [163] but on the contrary His power is declared to
   be efficacious in the minister. But as we sometimes, in so far as our
   judgment is depraved, take occasion improperly from this to extol men
   too highly, we require to distinguish for the purpose of correcting
   this fault, and we must set the Lord on the one side, and the minister
   on the other, and then it becomes manifest, how indigent man is in
   himself, and how utterly devoid of efficacy.

   Let it be known by us, therefore, that in this passage ministers are
   brought into comparison with the Lord, and the reason of this
   comparison is -- that mankind, while estimating grudgingly the grace of
   God, are too lavish in their commendations of ministers, and in this
   manner they snatch away what is God's, with the view of transferring it
   to themselves. At the same time he always observes a most becoming
   medium, for when he says, that God giveth the increase, he intimates by
   this, that the efforts of men themselves are not without success. The
   case is the same as to the sacraments, as we shall see elsewhere. [164]
   Hence, although our heavenly Father does not reject our labor in
   cultivating his field, and does not allow it to be unproductive, yet he
   will have its success depend exclusively upon his blessing, that he may
   have the entire praise. Accordingly, if we are desirous to make any
   progress in laboring, in striving, in pressing forward, let it be known
   by us, that we will make no progress, unless he prospers our labors,
   our strivings, and our assiduity, in order that we may commend
   ourselves, and everything we do to his grace.

   8. He that planteth, and he that watereth are one He shows farther,
   from another consideration, that the Corinthians are greatly to blame
   in abusing, with a view to maintain their own sects and parties, the
   names of their teachers, who in the meantime are, with united efforts,
   aiming at one and the same thing, and can by no means be separated, or
   torn asunder, without at the same time leaving off the duties of their
   office. They are one, says he; in other words, they are so linked
   together, that their connection does not allow of any separation,
   because all ought to have one end in view, and they serve one Lord, and
   are engaged in the same work. Hence, if they employ themselves
   faithfully in cultivating the Lord's field, they will maintain unity;
   and, by mutual communication, will help each other -- so far from their
   names serving as standards to stir up contendings. Here we have a
   beautiful passage for exhorting ministers to concord. Meanwhile,
   however, he indirectly reproves those ambitious teachers, who, by
   giving occasion for contentions, discovered thereby that they were not
   the servants of Christ, but the slaves of vain-glory -- that they did
   not employ themselves in planting and watering, but in rooting up and
   burning.

   Every man will receive his own reward Here he shows what is the end
   that all ministers should have in view -- not to catch the applause of
   the multitude, but to please the Lord. This, too, he does with the view
   of calling to the judgment-seat of God those ambitious teachers, who
   were intoxicated with the glory of the world, and thought of nothing
   else; and at the same time admonishing the Corinthians, as to the
   worthlessness of that empty applause which is drawn forth by elegance
   of expression and vain ostentation. He at the same time discovers in
   these words the fearlessness of his conscience, inasmuch as he ventures
   to look forward to the judgment of God without dismay. For the reason
   why ambitious men recommend themselves to the esteem of the world is,
   that they have not learned to devote themselves to God, and that they
   do not set before their eyes Christ's heavenly kingdom. Accordingly, as
   soon as God comes to be seen, that foolish desire of gaining man's
   favor disappears.

   9. For we are fellow-laborers with God. Here is the best argument. It
   is the Lord's work that we are employed in, and it is to him that we
   have devoted our labors: hence, as he is faithful and just, he will not
   disappoint us of our reward. That man, accordingly, is mistaken who
   looks to men, or depends merely on their remuneration. Here we have an
   admirable commendation of the ministry -- that while God could
   accomplish the work entirely himself, he calls us, puny mortals, [165]
   to be as it were his coadjutors, and makes use of us as instruments. As
   to the perversion of this statement by the Papists, for supporting
   their system of free-will, it is beyond measure silly, for Paul shows
   here, not what men can effect by their natural powers, but what the
   Lord accomplishes through means of them by his grace. As to the
   exposition given by some -- that Paul, being God's workman, was a
   fellow-workman with his colleagues, that is, with the other teachers --
   it appears to me harsh and forced, and there is nothing whatever in the
   case that shuts us up to have recourse to that refinement. For it
   corresponds admirably with the Apostle's design to understand him to
   mean, that, while it is peculiarly the work of God to build his temple,
   or cultivate his vineyard, he calls forth ministers to be
   fellow-laborers, by means of whom He alone works; but, at the same
   time, in such a way, that they in their turn labor in common with him.
   As to the reward of works, consult my Institutes [166]

   God's husbandry, God's building. These expressions may be explained in
   two ways. They may be taken actively in this sense: "You have been
   planted in the Lord's field by the labor of men in such a way, that our
   heavenly Father himself is the true Husbandman, and the Author of this
   plantation. You have been built up by men in such a way, that he
   himself is the true Master-builder. [167] Or, it may be taken in a
   passive sense, thus: "In laboring to till you, and to sow the word of
   God among you and water it, we have not done this on our own account,
   or with a view to advantage to accrue to us, but have devoted our
   service to the Lord. In our endeavors to build you up, we have not been
   influenced by a view to our own advantage, but with a view to your
   being God's planting and building. This latter interpretation I rather
   prefer, for I am of opinion, that Paul meant here to express the idea,
   that true ministers labor not for themselves, but for the Lord. Hence
   it follows, that the Corinthians were greatly to blame in devoting
   themselves to men, [168] while of right they belonged exclusively to
   God. And, in the first place, he calls them his husbandry, following
   out the metaphor previously taken up, and then afterwards, with the
   view of introducing himself to a larger discussion, he makes use of
   another metaphor, derived from architecture. [169]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [154] "Sont un, ou une chose;" -- "Are one, or one thing."

   [155] "Car nous sommes ouuriers avec Dieu, ou, nous ensemble sommes
   ouuriers de Dieu;" -- "For we are workers with God, or we are together
   God's workmen."

   [156] "Afin que le propos soit moins odieux, et qu'on ne dise qu'il
   porte enuie aux autres;" -- "That the discourse may be less offensive,
   and that none may say that he bears envy towards others."

   [157] An instance of the same kind occurs in Romans 12:3 hekasto hos ho
   Theos euerise metron pisteos -- as God hath distributed to every one
   the measure of faith." Calvin, when commenting on the passage,
   observes, that it is an instance of "anastrophe, seu vocum inversio,
   pro Quemadmodum unicuique;" -- "anastrophe, or inversion of words for
   As to every one." -- Ed

   [158] "Combien aussi il est necessaire qu'elle continue et soit
   tousiours entretenue;" -- "How necessary it is also, that it continue
   and be always kept up."

   [159] "Tous les ans;" -- "Every year."

   [160] Our author refers to what he had, a little before, adverted to,
   as to the necessity for the word of God continuing to be dispensed. --
   Ed.

   [161] Calvin will be found adverting to the same subject at
   considerable length, when [4]commenting on 1 Corinthians 9:1. -- Ed.

   [162] "Suyuant ceste consideration;" -- "In accordance with this view."

   [163] "Car en ces facons de parler Christ n'est point separe du
   ministre;" -- "In these modes of expression Christ is not separated (or
   viewed apart) from the minister."

   [164] Calvin most probably refers here to the statements afterwards
   made by him, when [5]commenting on Galatians 3:27, to the following
   effect: "Respondeo, Paulum de Sacramentis bifariam solere loqui. Dum
   negotium est cum hypocritis, qui nudis signis superbiunt, tum
   concionatur, quam inanis ac nihili res sit externum signum: et in
   praeposteram fiduciam fortiter invehitur. Quare? non respicit Dei
   institutionem, sed impiorum corruptelam. Quum autem fideles alloquitur,
   qui rite utuntur signis, illa tunc conjungit cum sua veritate, quam
   figurant. Quare? neque enim fallacem pompam ostentat in Sacramentis,
   sed quae externa ceremonia figurat, exhibet simul re ipsa. Hinc fit, ut
   veritas, secundum Dei institutum, conjuncta sit cum signis;" -- "I
   answer, it is customary with Paul to speak of the Sacraments in two
   different ways. When he has to do with hypocrites, who glory in mere
   symbols, he in that case proclaims aloud the emptiness and
   worthlessness of the outward symbol, and denounces in strong terms
   their absurd confidence. Why so? It is because he has in view, not the
   ordinance of God, but the corruption of it by wicked men. When, on the
   other hand, he addresses believers, who make a proper use of the
   symbols, he in that case views them in connection with the reality
   which they represent. Why so? It is because he does not make a show of
   any false splendor as belonging to the Sacraments, but presents before
   our view in reality what the outward ceremony represents. Hence it
   comes that, agreeably to the divine appointment, the reality is
   associated with the symbols." The same subject is touched upon in the
   Institutes, volume 3. -- Ed.

   [165] "Poures vers de terre;" -- "Mere worms of the dust."

   [166] The subject of Rewards is largely treated of in the Institutes,
   volume 2. The reader will find the expression "laborers together with
   God" commented upon in the Institutes, volume 1. -- Ed.

   [167] "Et conducteur de l'oeuvre;" -- "And conductor of the work."

   [168] "De se rendre suiets aux hommes, et attacher la leurs
   affections;" -- "In making themselves subject to men, and placing their
   affections there."

   [169] "De la massonerie, ou charpenterie;" -- "From masonry, or
   carpentry."
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 3:10-15

   10. According to the grace of God which is given unto me, as a wise
   masterbuilder, I have laid the foundation, and another buildeth
   thereon. But let every man take heed how he buildeth thereupon.

   10. Ut saplens architectus, secundum gratiam Dei mihi datam,
   fundamentum posui, alius autem superaedificat: porro unusquisque
   videat, quomodo superaedificet.

   11. For other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is
   Jesus Christ.

   11. Fundamentum enim aliud nemo potest ponere, praeter id quod positum
   est, quod est Iesus Christus.

   12. Now if any man build upon this foundation gold, silver, precious
   stones, wood, hay, stubble;

   12. Si quis autem superstruat super fundamentum hoc aurum, argentum,
   lapides pretiosos, ligna, faenum, stipulam,

   13. Every man's work shall be made manifest: for the day shall declare
   it, because it shall be revealed by fire; and the fire shall try every
   man's work of what sort it is.

   13. Cuiuscunque opus manifestum fiet: dies enim manifestabit, quia in
   igne revelabitur, et cuiuscunque opus quale sit, ignis probabit.

   14. If any man's work abide which he hath built thereupon, he shall
   receive a reward.

   14. Si cuius opus maneat quod superaedificaverit, mercedem accipiet.

   15. If any man's work shall be burned, he shall suffer loss: but he
   himself shall be saved; yet so as by fire.

   15. Si cuius opus arserit, jacturam faciet: ipse autem salvus fiet, sic
   tamen tanquam per ignem. [170]


   10. As a wise master-builder It is a most apt similitude, and
   accordingly it is frequently met with in the Scriptures, as we shall
   see ere long. Here, however, the Apostle declares his fidelity with
   great confidence and fearlessness, as it required to be asserted in
   opposition not merely to the calumnies of the wicked, but also to the
   pride of the Corinthians, who had already begun to despise his
   doctrine. The more, therefore, they lowered him, so much the higher
   does he raise himself up, and speaking as it were from a pulpit of vast
   height, he declares [171] that he had been the first master-builder of
   God among them in laying the foundation, and that he had with wisdom
   executed that department of duty, and that it remained that others
   should go forward in the same manner, regulating the superstructure in
   conformity with the rule of the foundation. Let us observe that these
   things are said by Paul first of all for the purpose of commending his
   doctrine, which he saw was despised by the Corinthians; and, secondly,
   for the purpose of repressing the insolence of others, who from a
   desire for distinction, affected a new method of teaching. These he
   accordingly admonishes to attempt nothing rashly in God's building. Two
   things he prohibits them from doing: they must not venture to lay
   another foundation, and they must not raise a superstructure that will
   not be answerable to the foundation.

   According to the grace He always takes diligent heed not to usurp to
   himself a single particle of the glory that belongs to God, for he
   refers all thing's to God, and leaves nothing to himself, except his
   having been an instrument. While, however, he thus submits himself
   humbly to God, he indirectly reproves the arrogance of those who
   thought nothing of throwing the grace of God into the shade, [172]
   provided only they were themselves held in estimation. He hints, too,
   that there was nothing of the grace of the Spirit in that empty show,
   for which they were held in esteem, while on the other hand he clears
   himself from contempt, on the ground of his having been under divine
   influence. [173]

   11. For other foundation can no man lay This statement consists of two
   parts; first, that Christ is the only foundation of the Church; and
   secondly, that the Corinthians had been rightly founded upon Christ
   through Paul's preaching. For it was necessary that they should be
   brought back to Christ alone, inasmuch as their ears were tickled with
   a fondness for novelty. It was, too, of no small importance that Paul
   should be recognized as the principal, and, so to speak, fundamental
   master-builder, from whose doctrine they could not draw back, without
   forsaking Christ himself. The sum is this -- that the Church must by
   all means be founded upon Christ alone, and that Paul had executed this
   department of duty so faithfully that nothing could be found to be
   wanting in his ministry. Hence, whoever may come after him, can in no
   other way serve the Lord with a good conscience, or be listened to as
   ministers of Christ, than by studying to make their doctrine correspond
   with his, and retain the foundation which he has laid. Hence we infer,
   that those are not faithful workmen for building up the Church, but on
   the contrary are scatterers of it, (Matthew 12:30,) who succeed
   faithful ministers, but do not make it their aim to conform themselves
   to their doctrine, and carry forward what has been well commenced, so
   as to make it quite manifest [174] that they are attempting no new
   work. For what can be more pernicious than by a new manner of teaching
   to harass believers, who have been well instructed in pure doctrine, so
   that they stagger in uncertainty as to the true foundation. Now the
   fundamental doctrine, which it were unlawful to undermine, is, that we
   learn Christ, for Christ is the only foundation of the Church; but
   there are many who, while they make use of Christ's name in pretense,
   tear up the whole truth of God by the roots. [175]

   Let us observe, then, in what way the Church is rightly built upon
   Christ. It is when he alone is set forth for righteousness, redemption,
   sanctification, wisdom, satisfaction and cleansing; in short, for life
   and glory; or if you would have it stated more briefly, when he is
   proclaimed in such a manner that his office and influence are
   understood in accordance with what we found stated in the close of the
   first chapter. (1 Corinthians 1:30.) If, on the other hand, Christ is
   only in some degree acknowledged, and is called a Redeemer only in
   name, while in the meantime recourse is had to some other quarter for
   righteousness, sanctification and salvation, he is driven off from the
   foundation, and spurious [176] stones are substituted in his room. It
   is in this manner that Papists act, who rob him of almost all his
   ornaments, leaving him scarcely anything but the bare name. Such
   persons, then, are far from being founded on Christ. For as Christ is
   the foundation of the Church, because he is the only source of
   salvation and eternal life -- because in him we come to know God the
   Father -- because in him we have the source of every blessing; if he is
   not acknowledged as such he is no longer regarded as the foundation

   But it is asked -- "Is Christ only a part, or simply the commencement
   of the doctrine of salvation, as the foundation is merely a part of the
   building; for if it were so, believers would have only their
   commencement in Christ, and would be perfected without him. Now this
   Paul might seem to intimate." I answer that this is not the meaning of
   the words; otherwise he would contradict himself when he says
   elsewhere, that "in him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
   knowledge." (Colossians 2:3.) He, then, who has learned Christ,
   (Ephesians 4:20,) is already complete in the whole system of heavenly
   doctrine. But as Paul's ministry had contemplated rather the founding
   of the Corinthians than the raising up among them of the top-stone of
   the building, he merely shows here what he had done in respect of his
   having preached Christ in purity. With respect to himself therefore, he
   calls him the foundation, while at the same time he does not thereby
   exclude him from the rest of the building. In fine, Paul does not put
   any kind of doctrine in opposition to the knowledge of Christ, but on
   the contrary there is a comparison between himself and the ministers.

   12. Now if any man build upon this foundation He pursues still farther
   the metaphor. It would not have been enough to have laid the foundation
   if the entire superstructure did not correspond; for as it were an
   absurd thing to raise a structure of vile materials on a foundation of
   gold, so it were greatly criminal to bury Christ under a mass of
   strange doctrines. [177] By gold, then, and silver, and precious
   stones, he means doctrine worthy of Christ, and of such a nature as to
   be a superstructure corresponding to such a foundation. Let us not
   imagine, however, that this doctrine is apart from Christ, but on the
   contrary let us understand that we must continue to preach Christ until
   the very completion of the building. Only we must observe order, so as
   to begin with general doctrine, and more essential articles, as the
   foundations, and then go on to admonitions, exhortations, and
   everything that is requisite for perseverance, confirmation, and
   advancement.

   As there is an agreement thus far as to Paul's meaning, without any
   controversy, it follows on the other hand, that by wood, stubble and
   hay, is meant doctrine not answering to the foundation, such as is
   forged in men's brain, and is thrust in upon us as though it were the
   oracles of God. [178] For God will have his Church trained up by the
   pure preaching of his own word, not by the contrivances of men, of
   which sort also is that which has no tendency to edification, as for
   example curious questions, (1 Timothy 1:4,) which commonly contribute
   more to ostentation, or some foolish appetite, than to the salvation of
   men.

   He forewarns them that every man's work will one day be made manifest
   of what sort it is, however it may be for a time concealed, as though
   he had said: "It may indeed happen, that unprincipled workmen may for a
   time deceive, so that the world does not perceive how far each one has
   labored faithfully or fraudulently, but what is now as it were buried
   in darkness must of necessity come to light, and what is now glorious
   in the eyes of men, must before the face of God fall down, and be
   regarded as worthless."

   13. For the day will declare it In the old translation it is the day of
   the Lord, [179] but it is probable that the words of the Lord were
   added by some one by way of explanation. The meaning unquestionably is
   complete without that addition. For with propriety we give the name of
   day to the time when darkness and obscurity are dispelled, and the
   truth is brought to light. Hence the Apostle forewarns us, that it
   cannot always remain a secret who have acted fraudulently in the work
   of the Lord, or who have conducted themselves with fidelity, as though
   he had said: "The darkness will not always remain: the light will one
   day break forth; which will make all things manifest." That day, I own,
   is God's -- not man's, but the metaphor is more elegant if you read
   simply -- the day, because Paul in this way conveys the idea, that the
   Lord's true servants cannot always be accurately distinguished from
   false workmen, inasmuch as virtues and vices are concealed by the
   darkness of the night. That night, however, will not always continue.
   For ambition is blind -- man's favor is blind -- the world's applause
   is blind, but this darkness God afterwards dispels in his own time.
   Take notice, that he always discovers the assurance of a good
   conscience, and with an unconquerable magnanimity despises perverse
   judgments; first, in order that he may call back the Corinthians from
   popular applause to a right rule of judgment; and secondly, for the
   purpose of confirming the authority of his ministry.

   Because it will be revealed by fire. Paul having spoken of doctrine
   metaphorically, now also applies metaphorically the name of fire to the
   very touchstone of doctrine, that the corresponding parts of the
   comparison may harmonize with each other. The fire, then, here meant is
   the Spirit of the Lord, who tries by his touchstone what doctrine
   resembles gold and what resembles stubble The nearer the doctrine of
   God is brought to this fire, so much the brighter will be its luster.
   On the other hand, what has had its origin in man's head will quickly
   vanish, [180] as stubble is consumed in the fire. There seems also to
   be an allusion to the day of which he makes mention: "Not only will
   those things which vain ambition, like a dark night, concealed among
   the Corinthians, be brought to light by the brightness of the sun, but
   there will also be a strength of heat, not merely for drying up and
   cleansing away the refuse, but also for burning up everything wrong."
   For however men may look upon themselves, as forming acute judgments,
   their discernment, notwithstanding, reaches no farther than appearance,
   which, for the most part, has no solidity. There is nothing but that
   day to which the Apostle appeals, that tests everything to the quick,
   not merely by its brightness, but also by its fiery flame.

   14. If any man's work remains, he will receive a reward. His meaning
   is, that those are fools who depend on man's estimation, so as to
   reckon it enough to be approved by men, for then only will the work
   have praise and recompense -- when it has stood the test of the day of
   the Lord Hence he exhorts His true ministers to have an eye to that
   day. For by the word remains, he intimates that doctrines fly about as
   it were in an unsettled state, nay more, like empty bubbles, they
   glitter for the moment, until they have come to be thoroughly tested.
   Hence it follows, that we must reckon as nothing all the applauses of
   the world, the emptiness of which will in a very little be exposed by
   heaven's judgment.

   15. If any man's work shall be burned. It is as though he had said: Let
   no man flatter himself on the ground that, in the opinion of men, he is
   reckoned among the most eminent master-builders, for as soon as the day
   breaks in, his whole work must go utterly to nothing, if it is not
   approved of by the Lord. This, then, is the rule to which every one's
   ministry requires to be conformed. Some explain this of doctrine, so
   that zemiousthai [181] means simply to perish, and then what
   immediately follows they view as referring to the foundation, because
   in the Greek themelios (foundation) is in the masculine gender. They do
   not, however, sufficiently attend to the entire context. For Paul in
   this passage subjects to trial, not his own doctrine, but that of
   others. [182] Hence it were out of place to make mention at present of
   the foundation. He has stated a little before, that every man's work
   will be tried by fire. He comes afterwards to state an alternative,
   which ought not to be extended beyond that general observation. Now it
   is certain that Paul spoke there simply of the structure which had been
   erected upon the foundation. He has already in the first clause
   promised a reward to good master-builders, [183] whose labor shall have
   been approved of. Hence the contrast in the second clause suits
   admirably well -- that those who have mixed stubble, or wood, or straw,
   will be disappointed of the commendation which they had expected.

   He himself will be saved, etc. It is certain that Paul speaks of those
   who, while always retaining the foundations, mix hay with gold, stubble
   with silver, and wood with precious stones -- that is, those who build
   upon Christ, but in consequence of the weakness of the flesh, admit
   something that is man's, or through ignorance turn aside to some extent
   from the strict purity of God's word. Such were many of the saints,
   Cyprian, Ambrose, Augustine, and the like. Add to these, if you choose,
   from those of later times, Gregory and Bernard, and others of that
   stamp, who, while they had it as their object to build upon Christ, did
   nevertheless often deviate from the right system of building. Such
   persons, Paul says, could be saved, but on this condition -- if the
   Lord wiped away their ignorance, and purged them from all dross.

   This is the meaning of the clause so as by fire. He means, therefore,
   to intimate, that he does not take away from them the hope of
   salvation, provided they willingly submit to the loss of their labor,
   and are purged by the mercy of God, as gold is refined in the furnace.
   Farther, although God sometimes purges his own people by afflictions,
   yet here by the name of fire, I understand the touchstone of the
   Spirit, by which the Lord corrects and removes the ignorance of his
   people, by which they were for a time held captive. I am aware, indeed,
   that, many refer this to the cross, [184] but I am confident that my
   interpretation will please all that are of sound judgment.

   It remains, that we give an answer in passing to the Papists, who
   endeavor from this passage to prop up Purgatory. "The sinners [185]
   whom God forgives, pass through the fire, that they may be saved."
   Hence they in this way suffer punishment in the presence of God, so as
   to afford satisfaction to his justice I pass over their endless
   fictions in reference to the measure of punishment, and the means of
   redemption from them, but I ask, who they are that pass through the
   fire? Paul assuredly speaks of ministers alone. "There is the same
   reason," they say, "as to all." It is not for us [186] but for God to
   judge as to this matter. But even granting them this, how childishly
   they stumble at the term fire. For to what purpose is this fire, [187]
   but for burning up the hay and straw, and on the other hand, for
   proving the gold and silver. Do they mean to say that doctrines are
   discerned by the fire of their purgatory? Who has ever learned from
   that, what difference there is between truth and falsehood? Farther,
   when will that day come that will shine forth so as to discover every
   one's work? Did it begin at the beginning of the world, and will it
   continue without interruption to the end? If the terms stubble, hay,
   gold, and silver are figurative, as they must necessarily allow, what
   correspondence will there be between the different clauses, if there is
   nothing figurative in the term fire? Away, then, with such silly
   trifles, which carry their absurdity in their forehead, for the
   Apostle's true meaning is, I think, sufficiently manifest.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [170] "Par feu, ou parmi le feu;" -- "By fire, or amidst the fire."

   [171] "I1 leur fait assavoir, et declare fort et ferme:" -- "He gives
   them to know, and declares strongly and firmly."

   [172] "Ne faisoyent point de conscience d'amoindrir ou offusquer la
   grace de Dieu;" -- "Made no scruple of disparaging or obscuring the
   grace of God."

   [173] "Monstrant, quant a luy qu'il a este pousse et conduit de Dieu,
   il se defend et maintient contre tout mepris;" -- "Showing, as to
   himself, that he had been led on and conducted by God, he guards and
   defends himself against all contempt."

   [174] "En sorte qu'on puisse voir a l'oeil;" -- "So that one may see
   with the eye."

   [175] "Arrachent et renversent entierement;" -- "They tear up and
   entirely overthrow"

   [176] "Et non eonvenantes;" -- "And not suitable."

   [177] "Ce seroit vne chose mal seante que Christ lust suffoque en
   mettant et meslant auec luy quelques doctrines estranges;" -- "It were
   an unseemly thing that Christ should be choked by placing upon him and
   mixing up with him some strange doctrines."

   [178] "On vent a force faire receuoir pour oracles et reuelations
   procedees de Dieu;" -- "They would force us to receive it as if it were
   oracles and revelations that have come forth from God."

   [179] It is so in two of the old English versions. In Wiclif's version
   (1380) the rendering is as follows: For the dai of the Lord schal
   declare. The Rheims version (1582) reads thus: For the day of our Lord
   will declare. -- Ed.

   [180] "Celle, qui aura este forgee au cerveau des hommes s'esuanouira
   tout incontinent, et s'en ira en fumee;" -- "That which has been forged
   in man's brain, will quickly vanish, and go off in smoke."

   [181] "Le mot Grec suyuant, qui signifie souffrir perte ou dommage;" --
   "The Greek word following, which signifies to suffer loss or damage."

   [182] "Car ce n'est pas sa doctrine, mais celle des autres que Sainct
   Paul dit, qui viendra a l'examen;" -- "For it is not his own doctrine,
   but that of others, that St. Paul says will come to be tested."

   [183] "Et fideles ouuriers;" -- "And faithful workmen."

   [184] "Et affliction;" -- "And affliction."

   [185] "Les pecheurs, (disent-ils);" -- "The sinners, (say they)."

   [186] "Je respon, que ce n'est pas a nous;" -- "I answer, that it is
   not for us."

   [187] "Car a quel propos est-il yci parle du feu?" -- "For to what
   purpose does he speak here of fire?"
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 3:16-23

   16. Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of
   God dwelleth in you?

   16. An nescitis, quod templum Dei estis et Spiritus Dei habitat in
   vobis?

   17. If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy; for the
   temple of God is holy, which temple ye are.

   17. Si quis ternplum Dei corrumpit, [188] hunc perdet Deus. Templum
   enim Dei sanctum est, quod estis vos.

   18. Let no man deceive himself. If any man among you seemeth to be wise
   in this world, let him become a fool, that he may be wise,

   18. Nemo se decipiat, si quis videtur sapiens esse inter vos: in
   saeculo hoc stultus fiat, [189] ut fiat sapiens.

   19. For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. For it is
   written, He taketh the wise in their own craftiness.

   19. Sapientia enim mundi huius stultitia est apud Deum. Scriptum est
   enim (Job 5:13) Deprehendens sapientes in astutia sua.

   20. And again, The Lord knoweth the thoughts of the wise, that they are
   vain.

   20. Et rursum (Psalm 94:11) Dominus novit cogitationes sapientum vanas
   esse.

   21. Therefore let no man glory in men. For all things are yours;

   21. Proinde nemo glorietur in hominibus, omnia enim vestra sunt;

   22. Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or
   death, or things present, or things to come; all are yours;

   22. Sive Paulus, sive Apollos, sive Cephas, sive mundus, sive vita,
   sive mors, sive prmsentia, sive futura: omnia vestra sunt,

   23. And ye are Christ's; and Christ is God's.

   23. Vos autem Christi; Christus autem Dei.


   16. Know ye not, etc. Having admonished the teachers as to their duty,
   he now addresses himself to the pupils -- that they, too, may take heed
   to themselves. To the teachers he had said, "You are the
   master-builders of the house of God." He now says to the people, "You
   are the temples of God. It is your part, therefore, to take care that
   you be not, in any way defiled." Now, the design [190] is, that they
   may not prostitute themselves to the service of men. He confers upon
   them distinguished honor in speaking thus, but it is in order that they
   may be made the more reprehensible; for, as God has set them apart as a
   temple to himself, he has at the same time appointed them to be
   guardians of his temple It is sacrilege, then, if they give themselves
   up to the service of men. He speaks of all of them collectively as
   being one temple of God; for every believer is a living stone, (1 Peter
   2:5,) for the rearing up of the building of God. At the same time they
   also, in some cases, individually receive the name of temples We shall
   find him a little afterwards (1 Corinthians 6:19) repeating the same
   sentiment, but for another purpose. For in that passage he treats of
   chastity; but here, on the other hand, he exhorts them to have their
   faith resting on the obedience of Christ alone. The interrogation gives
   additional emphasis; for he indirectly intimates, that he speaks to
   them of a thing that they knew, while he appeals to them as witnesses.

   And the Spirit of God. Here we have the reason why they are the temple
   of God Hence and must be understood as meaning because [191] This is
   customary, as in the words of the poet -- "Thou hadst heard it, and it
   had been reported." "For this reason," says he, "are ye the temples of
   God, because He dwells in you by his Spirit; for no unclean place can
   be the habitation of God." In this passage we have an explicit
   testimony for maintaining the divinity of the Holy Spirit. For if he
   were a creature, or merely a gift, he would not make us temples of God,
   by dwelling in us. At the same time we learn, in what manner God
   communicates himself to us, and by what tie we are bound to him -- when
   he pours down upon us the influence of his Spirit.

   17. If any man corrupts the temple of God. He subjoins a dreadful
   threatening -- that, as the temple of God ought to be inviolably
   sacred, that man, whoever he may be, that corrupts it, will not pass
   with impunity. The kind of profanation of which he now speaks, is, when
   men intrude themselves, so as to bear rule in the Church in the place
   of God. For as that faith, which is devoted to the pure doctrine of
   Christ, is called elsewhere spiritual chastity, (2 Corinthians 11:2,)
   so it also sanctifies our souls for the right and pure worship of God.
   For as soon as we are tinctured with the contrivances of men, the
   temple of God is polluted, as it were, with filth, because the
   sacrifice of faith, which he claims for himself alone, is in that case
   offered to creatures.

   18. Let no man deceive himself Here he puts his finger upon the true
   sore, as the whole mischief originated in this -- that they were wise
   in their own conceit. Hence he exhorts them not to deceive themselves
   with a false impression, by arrogating any wisdom to themselves -- by
   which he means, that all are under a mistake, who depend upon their own
   judgment. Now, he addresses himself, in my opinion, to hearers as well
   as teachers. For the former discovered a partiality for those ambitious
   men, and lent an ear to them, [192] because they had too fastidious a
   taste, so that the simplicity of the gospel was insipid to their taste;
   while the latter aimed at nothing but show, that they might be in some
   estimation. He accordingly admonishes both to this effect -- "Let no
   one rest satisfied with his own wisdom, but let him who thinketh
   himself to be wise, become a fool in this world," or, "Let him who is
   distinguished in this world by reputation for wisdom, of his own accord
   empty himself, [193] and become a fool in his own estimation."

   Farther, in these words the Apostle does not require, that we should
   altogether renounce the wisdom that is implanted in us by nature, or
   acquired by long practice; but simply, that we subject it to the
   service of God, so as to have no wisdom but through his word. For this
   is what is meant by becoming a fool in this world, or in our own
   estimation -- when we are prepared to give way to God, and embrace with
   fear and reverence everything that he teaches us, rather than follow
   what may appear to us plausible. [194]

   The meaning of the clause in this world, is as though he had said --
   "According to the judgment or opinion of the world." For the wisdom of
   the world is this -- if we reckon ourselves sufficient of ourselves for
   taking counsel as to all matters (Psalm 13:2) for governing ourselves,
   and for managing whatever we have to do -- if we have no dependence on
   any other [195] -- if we feel no need of the guidance of another, but
   are competent to govern ourselves. [196] He, therefore, on, the other
   hand, is a fool in this world, who, renouncing his own understanding,
   allows himself to be directed by the Lord, as if with his eyes shut --
   who, distrusting himself, leans wholly upon the Lord, places his whole
   wisdom in him, and yields himself up to God in docility and submission.
   It is necessary that our wisdom should in this way vanish, in order
   that the will of God may have authority over us, and that we be emptied
   of our own understanding, that we may be filled with the wisdom of God.
   At the same time, the clause [197] may either be taken in connection
   with the first part of the verse, or joined with the last, but as the
   meaning is not much different, I leave every one to choose for himself.

   19. For the wisdom of this world This is an argument taken from things
   opposite. To maintain the one is to overturn the other. As, therefore,
   the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God, it follows that we
   cannot be wise in the sight of God, unless we are fools in the view of
   the world. We have already explained (1 Corinthians 1:20) what he means
   by the wisdom of this world; for natural perspicacity is a gift of God,
   and the liberal arts, and all the sciences by which wisdom is acquired,
   are gifts of God. They are confined, however, within their own limits;
   for into God's heavenly kingdom they cannot penetrate. Hence they must
   occupy the place of handmaid, not of mistress: nay more, they must be
   looked upon as empty and worthless, until they have become entirely
   subject to the word and Spirit of God. If, on the other hand, they set
   themselves in opposition to Christ, they must be looked upon as
   dangerous pests, and, if they strive to accomplish anything of
   themselves, as the worst of all hindrances. [198] Hence the wisdom of
   the world, in Paul's acceptation, is that which assumes to itself
   authority, and does not allow itself to be regulated by the word of
   God, or to be subdued, so as to yield itself up in entire subjection to
   him. Until, therefore, matters have come to this, that the individual
   acknowledges that he knows nothing but what he has learned from God,
   and, giving up his own understanding; resigns himself unreservedly to
   Christ's guidance, he is wise in the world's account, but he is foolish
   in the estimation of God.

   For it is written, He taketh the wise He confirms this from two
   Scripture proofs, the first of which is taken from Job 5:13, where the
   wisdom of God is extolled on this ground, that no wisdom of the world
   can stand before it.

   Now it is certain, that the Prophet speaks there of those that are
   cunning and crafty; but as the wisdom of man is invariably such without
   God, [199] it is with good reason that Paul applies it in this sense,
   -- that whatever wisdom men have of themselves is reckoned of no
   account in the sight of God. The second is from Psalm 94:11, where
   David, after claiming for God alone the office and authority of the
   Instructor of all, adds, that He knows the thoughts of all to be vain.
   Hence, in whatever estimation they are held by us, they are, in the
   judgment of God, vain Here we have an admirable passage for bringing
   down the confidence of the flesh, while God from on high declares that
   everything that the mind of man conceives and contrives is mere vanity
   [200]

   21. Therefore let no man glory in men As there is nothing that is more
   vain than man, how little security there is in leaning upon an
   evanescent shadow! Hence he infers with propriety from the preceding
   statement, that we must not glory in men, inasmuch as the Lord thus
   takes away from mankind universally every ground of glorying. At the
   same time this inference depends on the whole of the foregoing
   doctrine, as will appear ere long. For as we belong to Christ alone, it
   is with good reason that he teaches us, that any supremacy of man, by
   which the glory of Christ is impaired, involves sacrilege.

   22. All things are yours. He proceeds to show what place and station
   teachers should occupy [201] -- such as not to detract in any degree
   from the authority of Christ, the one Master. As therefore Christ is
   the Church's sole master, and as he alone without exception is worthy
   to be listened to, it is necessary to distinguish between him and
   others, as even Christ himself has testified respecting himself,
   (Matthew 23:8,) and no other is recommended to us by the Father with
   this honorable declaration, [202] "Hear ye him." (Matthew 17:5.) As,
   therefore, he alone is endowed with authority to rule us by his word,
   Paul says that others are ours -- meaning, that they are appointed to
   us by God with the view of our making use of them -- not that they
   should exercise dominion over our consciences. Thus on the one hand, he
   shows that they are not useless, and, on the other hand, he keeps them
   in their own place, that they may not exalt themselves in opposition to
   Christ. What he adds, as to death, life, and the rest, is hyperbolical,
   so far as concerns the passage before us. He had it in view, however,
   to reason, as it were, from the greater to the less, in this manner.
   "Christ having put in subjection to us life and death, and everything,
   can we doubt, whether he has not also made men subject to us, to help
   us by their ministrations -- not to oppress us by tyranny."

   Now if any one takes occasion from this to allege, that the writings
   both of Paul and of Peter are subject to our scrutiny, inasmuch as they
   were men, and are not exempted from the common lot of others, I answer,
   that Paul, while he does not by any means spare himself or Peter,
   admonishes the Corinthians to distinguish between the person of the
   individual, and the dignity or distinction of office. "As for myself,
   viewed as a man, I wish to be judged of simply as a man, that Christ
   alone may have distinction in our ministry." This, however, in a
   general way, we must hold, [203] that all who discharge the office of
   the ministry, are ours, from the highest to the lowest, so that we are
   at liberty to withhold our assent to their doctrine, until they show
   that it is from Christ. For they must all be tried, (1 John 4:1,)and we
   must yield obedience to them, only when they have satisfactorily shown
   themselves to be faithful servants of Christ. Now as to Peter and Paul,
   this point being beyond all controversy, and the Lord having furnished
   us with amply sufficient evidence, that their doctrine has come forth
   from Him, when we receive as an oracle from heaven, and venerate
   everything that they have delivered to us, we hear not so much them, as
   Christ speaking in them.

   23. Christ is God's This subjection relates to Christ's humanity, for
   by taking upon him our flesh, he assumed "the form" and condition "of a
   servant," that he might make himself obedient to his Father in all
   things. (Philippians 2:7, 8.) And assuredly, that we may cleave to God
   through him, it is necessary that he have God as his head (1
   Corinthians 11:3.) We must observe, however, with what intention Paul
   has added this. For he admonishes us, that the sum of our felicity
   consists in this, [204] that we are united to God who is the chief
   good, and this is accomplished when we are gathered together under the
   head that our heavenly Father has set over us. In the same sense Christ
   said to his disciples,

   "Ye ought to rejoice, because I go to the Father,
   for the Father is greater than I," (John 14:28,)

   for there he set himself forth as the medium, through which believers
   come to the original source of every blessing. It is certain, that
   those are left destitute of that signal blessing, who depart from the
   unity of the Head. [205] Hence this order of things suits the
   connection of the passage -- that those subject themselves to Christ
   alone, who desire to remain under God's jurisdiction.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [188] "Viole destruit;" -- "Violates, or destroys."

   [189] "Si aucvn entre vous cuide estre sage, qu'il soit fait fol en ce
   monde, afin qu'il soit sage -- ou, sage en ce monde, qu'il soit fait
   fol, afin, etc.;" -- "If any one among you seemeth to be wise, let him
   become a fool in this world, that he may be wise -- or, wise in this
   world, let him become a fool, that," etc.

   [190] "De cest aduertissement;" -- "Of this caution."

   [191] Audieras, et fama fitit. Virg. Eclog. 9. 11.

   [192] "Trop facilement;" -- "Too readily."

   [193] "Soit fait fol en soy de son bon gre s'abbaissant, et
   s'aneantissant soymesme;" -- "Let him become, of his own accord, a fool
   in his own estimation, abasing and emptying himself."

   [194] "Bon et raisonnable;" -- "Good and reasonable."

   [195] "Que de nous-mesmes;" -- "Than ourselves."

   [196] "Nous semble que nous sommes assez suffisans de nous conduire, et
   gouuerner nous-mesmes;" -- "It appears to us, that we are quite
   competent to conduct and govern ourselves."

   [197] "En ce monde;" -- "In this world."

   [198] "Ce sont de grans empeschemens, et bien a craindre;" -- "They are
   great hindrances, and much to be dreaded."

   [199] "Quand la sagesse de Dieu n'y est point;" -- "When the wisdom of
   God is not in it."

   [200] "The humbling tendency ef the statement referred to is well
   brought out by Fuller of Kettering. (Fuller's Works, volume 4, p. 89.)

   [201] "C'est a dire, quelle estime on en doit auoir;" -- "That is to
   easy, in what esteem they ought to be held."

   [202] "Nul autre ne nous a este donne du Pere authorize de ce titre et
   commandement;" -- "No other has been given to us by the Father,
   authorized by this distinction and injunction."

   [203] "Pour vne maxime;" -- "As a maxim."

   [204] "Car il nous donne a entendre, et remonstre, que le comble et la
   perfection de nostre felicite consiste la;" -- "For he gives us to
   understand, and shows, that the summit and perfection of our felicity
   consists in this."

   [205] "Qui ne retienent ce seul Chef;" -- "Who do not retain that sole
   Head."
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 4
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 4:1-5

   1. Let a man so account of us, as of the ministers of Christ, and
   stewards of the mysteries of God.

   1. Sic nos aestimet homo ut ministros Christi, et dispensatores
   arcanorum Dei.

   2. Moreover it is required in stewards, that a man be found faithful.

   2. Caeterum in ministris hoc quaeritur, ut fidelis aliquis reperiatur.

   3. But with me it is a very small thing that I should be judged of you,
   or of man's judgment: yea, I judge not mine own self.

   3. Mihi viro pro minimo est, a vobis diiudicari, aut ab humano die:
   [206] imo nec me ipsum diiudico.

   4. For I know nothing by myself; yet am I not hereby justified: but he
   that judgeth me is the Lord.

   4. Nullius enim rei mihi sum conscius: sed non in hoc sum justificatus.
   Porro qui me diiudicat, Dominus est.

   5. Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who
   both will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make
   manifest the counsels of the hearts: and then shall every man have
   praise of God.

   5. Itaque ne ante tempus quicquam iudicetis, donec venerit Dominus, qui
   et illustrabit abscondita tenebrarum, et manifestabit consilia cordium;
   et tunc laus erit cuique a Deo.


   1. Let a man so account of us As it was a matter of no little
   importance to see the Church in this manner torn by corrupt factions,
   from the likings or dislikings that were entertained towards
   individuals, he enters into a still more lengthened discussion as to
   the ministry of the word. Here there are three things to be considered
   in their order. In the first place, Paul describes the office of a
   pastor of the Church. Secondly, he shows, that it is not enough for any
   one to produce a title, or even to undertake the duty -- a faithful
   administration of the office being requisite. Thirdly, as the judgment
   formed of him by the Corinthians was preposterous, [207] he calls both
   himself and them to the judgment-seat of Christ. In the first place,
   then, he teaches in what estimation every teacher in the Church ought
   to be held. In this department he modifies his discourse in such a
   manner as neither, on the one hand, to lower the credit of the
   ministry, nor, on the other, to assign to man more than is expedient.
   For both of these things are exceedingly dangerous, because, when
   ministers are lowered, contempt of the word arises, [208] while, on the
   other hand, if they are extolled beyond measure, they abuse liberty,
   and become "wanton against the Lord." (1 Timothy 5:11.) Now the medium
   observed by Paul consists in this, that he calls them ministers of
   Christ; by which he intimates, that they ought to apply themselves not
   to their own work but to that of the Lord, who has hired them as his
   servants, and that they are not appointed to bear rule in an
   authoritative manner in the Church, but are subject to Christ's
   authority [209] -- in short, that they are servants, not masters.

   As to what he adds -- stewards of the mysteries of God, he expresses
   hereby the kind of service. By this he intimates, that their office
   extends no farther than this, that they are stewards of the mysteries
   of God In other words, what the Lord has committed to their charge they
   deliver over to men from hand to hand -- as the expression is [210] --
   not what they themselves might choose. "For this purpose has God chosen
   them as ministers of his Son, that he might through them communicate to
   men his heavenly wisdom, and hence they ought not to move a step beyond
   this." He appears, at the same time, to give a stroke indirectly to the
   Corinthians, who, leaving in the background the heavenly mysteries, had
   begun to hunt with excessive eagerness after strange inventions, and
   hence they valued their teachers for nothing but profane learning. It
   is an honorable distinction that he confers upon the gospel when he
   terms its contents the mysteries of God. But as the sacraments are
   connected with these mysteries as appendages, it follows, that those
   who have the charge of administering the word are the authorized
   stewards of them also.

   2. But it is required in ministers [211] It is as though he had said,
   it is not enough to be a steward if there be not an upright
   stewardship. Now the rule of an upright stewardship, is to conduct
   one's self in it with fidelity. It is a passage that ought to be
   carefully observed, for we see how haughtily [212] Papists require that
   everything that they do and teach should have the authority of law,
   simply on the ground of their being called pastors. On the other hand,
   Paul is so far from being satisfied with the mere title, that, in his
   view, it is not even enough that there is a legitimate call, unless the
   person who is called conducts himself in the office with fidelity. On
   every occasion, therefore, on which Papists hold up before us the mask
   of a name, for the purpose of maintaining the tyranny of their idol,
   let our answer be, that Paul requires more than this from the ministers
   of Christ, though, at the same time, the Pope and his attendant train
   are wanting not merely in fidelity in the discharge of the office, but
   also in the ministry itself, if everything is duly considered.

   This passage, however, militates, not merely against wicked teachers,
   but also against all that have any other object in view than the glory
   of Christ and the edification of the Church. For every one that teaches
   the truth is not necessarily faithful, but, only he who desires from
   the heart to serve the Lord and advance Christ's kingdom. Nor is it
   without good reason that Augustine assigns to hirelings, (John 10:12,)
   a middle place between the wolves and the good teachers. As to Christ's
   requiring wisdom also on the part of the good steward, (Luke 12:42,) he
   speaks, it is true, in that passage with greater clearness than Paul,
   but the meaning is the same. For the faithfulness of which Christ
   speaks is uprightness of conscience, which must be accompanied with
   sound and prudent counsel. By a faithful minister Paul means one who,
   with knowledge as well as uprightness, [213] discharges the office of a
   good and faithful minister.

   3. But with me it is a very small thing It remained that he should
   bring before their view his faithfulness, that the Corinthians might
   judge of him from this, but, as their judgment was corrupted, he throws
   it aside and appeals to the judgment-seat of Christ. The Corinthians
   erred in this, that they looked with amazement at foreign masks, and
   gave no heed to the true and proper marks of distinction. [214] He,
   accordingly, declares with great confidence, that he despises a
   perverted and blind judgment of this sort. In this way, too, he, on the
   one hand, admirably exposes the vanity of the false Apostles who made
   the mere applause of men their aim, and reckoned themselves happy if
   they were held in admiration; and, on the other hand, he severely
   chastises the arrogance [215] of the Corinthians, which was the reason
   why they were so much blinded in their judgment.

   But, it is asked, on what ground it was allowable for Paul, not merely
   to set aside the censure of one Church, but to set himself above the
   judgment of men? for this is a condition common to all pastors -- to be
   judged of by the Church. I answer, that it is the part of a good pastor
   to submit both his doctrine and his life for examination to the
   judgment of the Church, and that it is the sign of a good conscience
   not to shun the light of careful inspection. In this respect Paul,
   without doubt, was prepared for submitting himself to the judgment of
   the Corinthian Church, and for being called to render an account both
   of his life and of his doctrine, had there been among them a proper
   scrutiny, [216] as he often assigns them this power, and of his own
   accord entreats them to be prepared to judge aright. But when a
   faithful pastor sees that he is borne down by unreasonable and perverse
   affections, and that justice and truth have no place, he ought to
   appeal to God, and betake himself to his judgment-seat, regardless of
   human opinion, especially when he cannot secure that a true and proper
   knowledge of matters shall be arrived at.

   If, then, the Lord's servants would bear in mind that they must act in
   this manner, let them allow their doctrine and life to be brought to
   the test, nay more, let them voluntarily present themselves for this
   purpose; and if anything is objected against them, let them not decline
   to answer. But if they see that they are condemned without being heard
   in their own defense, and that judgment is passed upon them without
   their being allowed a hearing, let them raise up their minds to such a
   pitch of magnanimity, as that, despising the opinions of men, they will
   fearlessly wait for God as their judge. In this manner the Prophets of
   old, having to do with refractory persons, [217] and such as had the
   audacity to despise the word of God in their administration of it,
   required to raise themselves aloft, in order to tread under foot that
   diabolical obstinacy, which manifestly tended to overthrow at once the
   authority of God and the light of truth. Should any one, however, when
   opportunity is given for defending himself, or at least when he has
   need to clear himself, appeal to God by way of subterfuge, he will not
   thereby make good his innocence, but will rather discover his
   consummate impudence. [218]

   Or of man's day. While others explain it in another manner, the simpler
   way, in my opinion, is to understand the word day as used
   metaphorically to mean judgment, because there are stated days for
   administering justice, and the accused are summoned to appear on a
   certain day He calls it man's day [219] when judgment is pronounced,
   not according to truth, or in accordance with the word of the Lord, but
   according to the humor or rashness of men, [220] and in short, when God
   does not preside. "Let men," says he, "sit for judgment as they please:
   it is enough for me that God will annul whatever they have pronounced."

   Nay, I judge not mine own self. The meaning is: "I do not venture to
   judge myself, though I know myself best; how then will you judge me, to
   whom I am less intimately known?" Now he proves that he does not
   venture to judge himself by this, that though he is not conscious to
   himself of anything wrong, he is not thereby acquitted in the sight of
   God. Hence he concludes, that what the Corinthians assume to
   themselves, belongs exclusively to God. "As for me," says he, "when I
   have carefully examined myself, I perceive that I am not so
   clear-sighted as to discern thoroughly my true character; and hence I
   leave this to the judgment of God, who alone can judge, and to whom
   this authority exclusively belongs. As for you, then, on what ground
   will you make pretensions to something more?"

   As, however, it were very absurd to reject all kinds of judgment,
   whether of individuals respecting themselves, or of one individual
   respecting his brother, or of all together respecting their pastor, let
   it be understood that Paul speaks here not of the actions of men, which
   may be reckoned good or bad according to the word of the Lord, but of
   the eminence of each individual, which ought not to be estimated
   according to men's humors. It belongs to God alone to determine what
   distinction every one holds, and what honor he deserves. The
   Corinthians, however, despising Paul, groundlessly extolled others to
   the skies, as though they had at their command that knowledge which
   belonged exclusively to God. This is what he previously made mention of
   as man's day -- when men mount the throne of judgment, and, as if they
   were gods, anticipate the day of Christ, who alone is appointed by the
   Father as judge, allot to every one his station of honor, assign to
   some a high place, and degrade others to the lowest seats. But what
   rule of distinction do they observe? They look merely to what appears
   openly; and thus what in their view is high and honorable, is in many
   instances an abomination in the sight of God. (Luke 16:15.) If any one
   farther objects, that the ministers of the word may in this world be
   distinguished by their works, as trees by their fruits, (Matthew 7:16,)
   I admit that this is true, but we must consider with whom Paul had to
   deal. It was with persons who, in judging, looked to nothing but show
   and pomp, and arrogated to themselves a power which Christ., while in
   this world, refrained from using -- that of assigning to every one his
   seat in the kingdom of God. (Matthew 20:23.) He does not, therefore,
   prohibit us from esteeming those whom we have found to be faithful
   workmen, and pronouncing them to be such; nor, on the other hand, from
   judging persons to be bad workmen according to the word of God, but he
   condemns that rashness which is practiced, when some are preferred
   above others in a spirit of ambition -- not according to their merits,
   but without examination of the case. [221]

   4. I am not conscious to myself of anything faulty. Let us observe that
   Paul speaks here not of his whole life, but simply of the office of
   apostleship. For if he had been altogether unconscious to himself of
   anything wrong, [222] that would have been a groundless complaint which
   he makes in Romans 7:15, where he laments that the evil which he would
   not, that he does, and that he is by sin kept back from giving himself
   up entirely to God. Paul, therefore, felt sin dwelling in him, and
   confessed it; but as to his apostleship, (which is the subject that is
   here treated of,) he had conducted himself with so much integrity and
   fidelity, that his conscience did not accuse him as to anything. This
   is a protestation of no common character, and of such a nature as
   clearly shows the piety and sanctity of his breast; [223] and yet he
   says that he is not thereby justified, that is, pure, and altogether
   free from guilt in the sight of God. Why? Assuredly, because God sees
   much more distinctly than we; and hence, what appears to us cleanest,
   is filthy in his eyes. Here we have a beautiful and singularly
   profitable admonition, not to measure the strictness of God's judgment
   by our own opinion; for we are dim-sighted, but God is preeminently
   discerning. We think of ourselves too indulgently, but God is a judge
   of the utmost strictness. Hence the truth of what Solomon says --

   "Every man's ways appear right his own eyes, but the Lord pondereth the
   hearts." (Proverbs 21:2.)

   Papists abuse this passage for the purpose of shaking the assurance of
   faith, and truly, I confess, that if their doctrine were admitted, we
   could do nothing but tremble in wretchedness during our whole life. For
   what tranquillity could our minds enjoy if it were to be determined
   from our works whether we are well-pleasing to God? I confess,
   therefore, that from the main foundation of Papists there follows
   nothing but continual disquietude for consciences; and, accordingly, we
   teach that we must have recourse to the free promise of mercy, which is
   offered to us in Christ, that we may be fully assured that we are
   accounted righteous by God.

   5. Therefore judge nothing before the time From this conclusion it is
   manifest, that Paul did not mean to reprove every kind of judgment
   without exception, but only what is hasty and rash, without examination
   of the case. For the Corinthians did not mark with unjaundiced eye the
   character of each individual, but, blinded by ambition, groundlessly
   extolled one and depreciated another, and took upon themselves to mark
   out the dignity of each individual beyond what is lawful for men. Let
   us know, then, how much is allowed us, what is now within the sphere of
   our knowledge, and what is deferred until the day of Christ, and let us
   not attempt to go beyond these limits. For there are some things that
   are now seen openly, while there are others that lie buried in
   obscurity until the day of Christ.

   Who will bring to light. If this is affirmed truly and properly
   respecting the day of Christ, it follows that matters are never so well
   regulated in this world but that many things are involved in darkness,
   and that there is never so much light, but that many things remain in
   obscurity. I speak of the life of men, and their actions. He explains
   in the second clause, what is the cause of the obscurity and confusion,
   so that all things are not now manifest. It is because there are
   wonderful recesses and deepest lurking-places in the hearts of men.
   Hence, until the thoughts of the hearts are brought to light, there
   will always be darkness.

   And then shall every one have praise It is as though he had said, "You
   now, O Corinthians, as if you had the adjudging of the prizes, [224]
   crown some, and send away others with disgrace, but this right and
   office belong exclusively to Christ. You do that before the time --
   before it has become manifest who is worthy to be crowned, but the Lord
   has appointed a day on which he will make it manifest." This statement
   takes its rise from the assurance of a good conscience, which brings us
   also this advantage, that committing our praises into the hands of God,
   we disregard the empty breath of human applause.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [206] "De iour humain -- c'est a dire, de iugement d'homme;" -- "Of
   man's day -- that is to say, of man's judgment."

   [207] "Pource que les Corinthiens iugeoyent de luy d'vne mauuaise
   sorte, et bien inconsidereement;" -- "As the Corinthians judged of him
   in an unfavorable way, and very rashly."

   [208] "Facilement on viendra a mespriser la parole de Dieu;" -- "They
   will readily come to despise the word of God."

   [209] "Ils sont eux-mesmes comme les autres sous la domination de
   Christ;" -- "They are themselves, in common with others, under the
   dominion of Christ."

   [210] Our Author makes use of the same expression when commenting on 1
   Corinthians [6]11:23, and 1 Corinthians [7]15:3. -- Ed.

   [211] "Entre les dispensateurs;" -- "Among stewards."

   [212] "Et d'une facon magistrale;" -- "And with a magisterial air."

   [213] "Auec science et bonne discretion, et d'vn coeur droit;" -- "With
   knowledge and good discretion, as well as with an upright heart."

   [214] "Ils estoyent rauis en admiration de ces masques externes, comme
   gens tout transportez, et ne regardoyent point a discerner vrayement ne
   proprement;" -- "They were ravished with admiration of those foreign
   masks, as persons quite transported, and were not careful to
   distinguish truly or properly."

   [215] "Et orgueil;" -- "And pride."

   [216] "Si entr'eux fi y eust eu vne legitime et droite facon de iuger;"
   -- "If there had been among them a lawful and right method of judging."

   [217] "Ils auoyent affaire a des gens opiniastres et pleins de
   rebellion;" -- "They had to do with persons that were obstinate, and
   full of rebellion."

   [218] "Se demonstrera estre merueilleusement impudent;" -- "He will
   show himself to be marvellously impudent."

   [219] The word day, which is the literal rendering of the original word
   (hemeras) is made use of in some of the old English versions. Thus in
   Wiclif's version, (1380,) the rendering is: "of mannes daie;" in
   Tyndale's, (1534,) "of man's daye;" and in the Rheims version, (1582,)
   "of man's day." -- Ed

   [220] "Selon les sottes affections, ou les mouuemens temeraires des
   hommes;" -- "According to the foolish affections, or rash impulses of
   men."

   [221] "Comme on dit;" -- "As they say."

   [222] "Si nihil prorsus sibi consciret;" -- our author most probably
   had in his eye a well-known passage in Horace, (Ep. I. 1. 61,) "Nil
   conscire sibi;" -- "To be conscious to one's self of nothing wrong." --
   Ed.

   [223] "Combien sa conscience estoit pure et nette;" -- "How pure and
   clean his conscience was."

   [224] "Tanquam agonothetos The allusion is to the presiding officers or
   umpires (agonothetai) who adjudged the prizes in the Grecian games.
   (See Herod. 6. 127.) -- Ed
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 4:6-8

   6. And these things, brethren, I have in a figure transferred to myself
   and to Apollos for your sakes; that ye might learn in us not to think
   of men above that which is written, that no one of you be puffed up for
   one against another.

   6. Haec autem, fratres, transfiguravi in me ipsum et Apollo propter
   vos, ut in nobis disceretis, quis supra id quod scriptum est, de se
   sentiat: ut ne quis pro hoc vel illo infletur adversus alterum.

   7. For who maketh thee to differ from another? and what hast thou that
   thou didst not receive? now if thou didst receive it, why dost thou
   glory, as if thou hadst not received it?

   7. Quis enim to discernit? quid autem habes, quod non acceperis? si
   vero etiam acceperis, quid gloriaris tanquam non acceperis?

   8. Now ye are full, now ye are rich, ye have reigned as kings without
   us: and I would to God ye did reign, that we also might reign with you.

   8. Jam saturati estis, jam ditati estis, absque nobis regnum adepti
   estis; atque utinam sitis adepti ut et nos vobiscum regnemus.


   6. I have in a figure transferred. Hence we may infer, that it was not
   those who were attached to Paul that gave rise to parties, as they,
   assuredly, had not. been so instructed, but those who had through
   ambition given themselves up to vain teachers. [225] But as he could
   more freely and less invidiously bring forward his own name, and that
   of his brethren, he preferred to point out in his own person the fault
   that existed in others. At the same time, he strikes a severe blow at
   the originators of the parties, and points his finger to the sources
   from which this deadly divorce took its rise. For he shows them, that
   if they had been satisfied with good teachers, they would have been
   exempted from this evil. [226]

   That is us. Some manuscripts have it "that in you." Both readings suit
   well, and their is no difference of meaning; for what Paul intends is
   this -- "I have, for the sake of example, transferred these things to
   myself and Apollos, in order that you may transfer this example to
   yourselves." "Learn then in us," that is, "in that example which I have
   placed before you in our person as in a mirror;" or, "Learn in you,"
   that is, "apply this example to yourselves." But what does he wish them
   to learn? That no one be puffed up for his own teacher against another,
   that is, that they be not lifted up with pride on account of their
   teachers, and do not abuse their names for the purpose of forming
   parties, and rending the Church asunder. Observe, too, that pride or
   haughtiness is the cause and commencement of all contentions, when
   every one, assuming to himself more than he is entitled to do, is eager
   to have others in subjection to him.

   The clause above what is written may be explained in two ways -- either
   as referring to Paul's writings, or to the proofs from Scripture which
   he has brought forward. As this, however, is a matter of small moment,
   my readers may be left at liberty to take whichever they may prefer.

   7. For who distinguisheth thee? The meaning is -- "Let that man come
   forward, whosoever he be, that is desirous of distinction, and troubles
   the Church by his ambition. I will demand of him who it is that makes
   him superior to others? That is, who it is that has conferred upon him
   the privilege of being taken out of the rank of the others, and made
   superior to others?" Now this whole reasoning depends on the order
   which the Lord has appointed in his Church -- that the members of
   Christ's body may be united together, and that every one of them may
   rest satisfied with his own place, his own rank, his own office, and
   his own honor. If one member is desirous to quit his place, that he may
   leap over into the place of another, and invade his office, what will
   become of the entire body? Let us know, then, that the Lord has so
   placed us in the Church, and has in such a manner assigned to every one
   his own station, that, being under one head, we may be mutually helpful
   to each other. Let us know, besides, that we have been endowed with a
   diversity of gifts, in order that we may serve the Lord with modesty
   and humility, and may endeavor to promote the glory of him who has
   conferred upon us everything that we have. This, then, was the best
   remedy for correcting the ambition of those who were desirous of
   distinction -- to call them back to God, in order that they might
   acknowledge that it was not according to any one's pleasure that he was
   placed in a high or a low station, but that this belonged to God alone;
   and farther, that God does not confer so much upon any one as to
   elevate him to the place of the Head, but distributes his gifts in such
   a manner, that He alone is glorified in all things.

   To distinguish here means to render eminent. [227] Augustine, however,
   does not ineptly make frequent use of this declaration for maintaining,
   in opposition to the Pelagians, [228] that whatever there is of
   excellence in mankind, is not implanted in him by nature, so that it
   could be ascribed either to nature or to descent; and farther, that it
   is not acquired by free will, so as to bring God under obligation, but
   flows from his pure and undeserved mercy. For there can be no doubt
   that Paul here contrasts the grace of God with the merit or worthiness
   of men. [229]

   And what hast thou? This is a confirmation of the preceding statement,
   for that man cannot on good ground extol himself, who has no
   superiority above others. For what greater vanity is there than that of
   boasting without any ground for it? Now, there is no man that has
   anything of excellency from himself; therefore the man that extols
   himself is a fool and an idiot. The true foundation of Christian
   modesty is this -- not to be self-complacent, as knowing that we are
   empty and void of everything good -- that, if God has implanted in us
   anything that is good, we are so much the more debtors to his grace;
   and in fine, that, as Cyprian says, we must glory in nothing, because
   there is nothing that is our own.

   Why dost thou glory as if thou hadst not received it? Observe, that
   there remains no ground for our glorying, inasmuch as it is by

   the grace of God that we are what we are,
   (1 Corinthians 15:10.)

   And this is what we had in the first chapter, that Christ is the source
   of all blessings to us, that we may learn to glory in the Lord, (1
   Corinthians 1:30, 31,) and this we do, only when we renounce our own
   glory. For God does not obtain his due otherwise than by our being
   emptied, so that it may be seen that everything in us that is worthy of
   praise is derived.

   8. Now ye are full Having in good earnest, and without the use of any
   figure, beat down their vain confidence, he now also ridicules it by
   way of irony, [230] because they are so self-complacent, as if they
   were the happiest persons in the world. He proceeds, too, step by step,
   in exposing their insolence. In the first place, he says, that they
   were full: this refers to the past. He then adds, Ye are rich: this
   applies to the future. Lastly, he says, that they had reigned as kings
   this is much more than either of those two. It is as though he had
   said, "What will you attain to, when you appear to be not merely full
   for the present, but are also rich for the future -- nay more, are
   kings?" At the same time, he tacitly upbraids them with ingratitude,
   because they had the audacity to despise him, or rather those, through
   means of whom they had obtained everything.

   Without us, says he. "For Apollos and I are now esteemed nothing by
   you, though it is by our instrumentality that the Lord has conferred
   everything upon you. What inhumanity there is in resting with
   self-complacency in the gifts of God, while in the meantime you despise
   those through whose instrumentality you obtained them!"

   And I would to God that ye did reign [231] Here he declares that he
   does not envy their felicity, (if indeed they have any,) and that from
   the beginning he has not sought to reign among them, but only to bring
   them to the kingdom of God. He intimates, however, on the other hand,
   that the kingdom in which they gloried was merely imaginary, and that
   their glorying was groundless and pernicious, [232] there being no true
   glorying but that which is enjoyed by all the sons of God in common,
   under Christ their Head, and every one of them according to the measure
   of the grace that has been given him.

   For by these words that ye also may reign with us, he means this --
   "You are so renowned in your own opinion that you do not hesitate to
   despise me, and those like me, but mark, how vain is your glorying. For
   you can have no glorying before God, in which we have not a share --
   for if honor redounds to you from having the gospel of God, how much
   more to us, by whose ministry it was conveyed to you! And assuredly,
   this is a madness [233] that is common to all the proud, that by
   drawing everything to themselves, they strip themselves of every
   blessing -- nay more, they renounce the hope of everlasting salvation."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [225] "A ces docteurs pieins d'ostentation;" -- "To those teachers,
   full of ostentation."

   [226] "S'ils se contentent de bons et fideles docteurs, ils seront hors
   de danger d'vn tel mal;" -- "If they had contented themselves with good
   and faithful teachers, they would have been beyond the risk of such an
   evil."

   [227] "Rendre excellent, ou mettre en reputation;" -- "To render
   eminent, or exalt to fame."

   [228] The reader will find a variety of passages of this tenor quoted
   from Augustine in the Institutes, volume 1. -- Ed.

   [229] "Comme estans ehoses contraires;" -- "As being things opposite."

   [230] "Vsant d'ironie, c'est a dire, d'vne facon de parler qui sonne en
   mocquerie;" -- "Making use of irony, that is to say, a form of speech
   that has a tone of mockery."

   [231] "A bitter taunt," says Lightfoot, "chastising the boasting of the
   Corinthians, who had forgot from whom they had first received those
   evangelical privileges, concerning which they now prided themselves.
   They were enriched with spiritual gifts; they reigned, themselves being
   judges, in the very top of the dignity and happiness of the gospel; and
   that, without us,' saith the Apostle, as though ye owed nothing to us
   for these privileges,' and, O would to God ye did reign, and that it
   went so happily and well with you indeed, that we also might reign with
   you, and that we might partake of some happiness in this your
   promotion, and might be of some account among you!'" -- Ed.

   [232] "Fausse et dangereuse:" -- "Groundless and dangerous."

   [233] "C'est vne folie, et bestise;" -- "This is a folly and
   stupidity."
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 4:9-15

   9. For I think that God hath set forth us the apostles last, as it were
   appointed to death: for we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to
   angels, and to men.

   9. Existimo enim, quod Deus nos postremos Apostolos demonstraverit
   tanquam morti destinatos: nam theatrum facti sumus mundo, et angelis,
   et hominibus.

   10. We are fools for Christ's sake, but ye are wise in Christ; we are
   weak, but ye are strong; ye are honourable, but we are despised.

   10. Nos stulti propter Christum, vos autem prudentes in Christo:
   infirmi, vos autem robusti: vos gloriosi, nos autem ignobiles.

   11. Even unto this present hour we both hunger, and thirst, and are
   naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain dwelling-place;

   11. Ad hanc enim horam usque et sitimus, et esurimus, et nudi sumus, et
   colaphis caedimur.

   12. And labour, working with our own hands: being reviled, we bless;
   being persecuted, we suffer it:

   12. Etcircumagimur, et laboramus operantes manibus propriis: maledictis
   lacessiti benedicimus: persequutionem patientes sustinemus:

   13. Being defamed, we intreat: we are made as the filth of the world,
   and are the offscouring of all things unto this day.

   13. Conviciis affecti obsecramus: quasi exsecrationes mundi facti
   sumus, omnium reiectamentum usque ad hunc diem.

   14. I write not these things to shame you, but as my beloved sons I
   warn you

   14. Non quo pudorem vobis incutiam, haec scribo: sed ut filios meos
   dilectos admoneo.

   15. For though ye have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet have ye
   not many fathers: for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the
   gospel.

   15. Nam etsi decem millia paedagogorum habueritis in Christo, non tamen
   multos patres; in Christo enim Iesu par Evangelium ego vos genui.


   9. For I think, etc. It is uncertain whether he speaks of himself
   exclusively, or takes in at the same time Apollos and Silvanus, for he
   sometimes calls such persons apostles. I prefer, however, to understand
   it of himself exclusively. Should any one be inclined to extend it
   farther, I shall have no particular objection, provided only he does
   not understand it as Chrysostom does, to mean that the apostles were as
   if for the sake of ignominy reserved to the last place. [234] For there
   can be no doubt that by the term last, he means those who were admitted
   to the rank of apostles subsequently to the resurrection of Christ.
   Now, he admits that he is like those who are exhibited to the people
   when on the eve of being led forth to death. For such is the meaning of
   the word exhibited -- as those who on occasion of a triumph were led
   round [235] for the sake of show, and were afterwards hurried away to
   prison to be strangled.

   This he expresses more distinctly by adding, that they were made a
   spectacle. "This," says he, "is my condition, that I exhibit to the
   world a spectacle of my miseries, like those who having been condemned
   to fight with wild beasts, [236] or to the games of the gladiators, or
   to some other mode of punishment, are brought forth to the view of the
   people, and that not before a few spectators, but before the whole
   world." Observe here the admirable steadfastness of Paul, who, while he
   saw himself to be dealt with by God in this manner, was nevertheless
   not broken or dispirited. For he does not impute it to the wantonness
   of the wicked, that he was, as it were, led forth with ignominy to the
   sport of the arena, but ascribes it wholly to the providence of God.

   The second clause to angels and to men, I take to be expository in this
   sense -- "I am made a sport and spectacle, not merely to earth, but
   also to heaven." This passage has been commonly explained as referring
   to devils, from its seeming to be absurd to refer it to good angels.
   Paul, however, does not mean, that all who are witnesses of this
   calamity are gratified with such a spectacle He simply means, that the
   Lord has so ordered his lot that he seems as though he had been
   appointed to furnish sport to the whole world.

   10. We are fools for Christ's sake This contrast is throughout
   ironical, and exceedingly pointed, it being unseemly and absurd that
   the Corinthians should be in every respect happy and honorable,
   according to the flesh, while in the meantime they beheld their master
   and father afflicted with the lowest ignominy, and with miseries of
   every kind. For those who are of opinion that Paul abases himself in
   this manner, in order that he may in earnestness ascribe to the
   Corinthians those things which he acknowledges himself to be in want
   of, may without any difficulty be refuted from the little clause that
   he afterwards subjoins. In speaking, therefore, of the Corinthians as
   wise in Christ, and strong, and honorable, he makes a concession
   ironically, as though he had said [237] -- "You desire, along with the
   gospel, to retain commendation for wisdom, [238] whereas I have not
   been able to preach Christ otherwise than by becoming a fool in this
   world. Now when I have willingly, on your account, submitted to be a
   fool, or to be reckoned such, consider whether it be reasonable that
   you should wish to be esteemed wise. How in these things consort --
   that I who have been your master, am a fool for Christ's sake, and you,
   on the other hand, remain wise!" In this way, being wise in Christ is
   not taken here in a good sense, for he derides the Corinthians for
   wishing to mix up together Christ and the wisdom of the flesh, inasmuch
   as this were to endeavor to unite things directly contrary.

   The case is the same as to the subsequent clauses -- "You are strong
   says he, and honorable, that is, you glory in the riches and resources
   of the world, you cannot endure the ignominy of the cross. In the
   meantime, is it reasonable that I should be on your account [239] mean
   and contemptible, and exposed to many infirmities? Now the complaint
   carries with it so much the more reproach [240] on this account, that
   even among themselves he was weak and contemptible. (2 Corinthians
   10:10.) In fine, he derides their vanity in this respect, that,
   reversing the order of things, those who were sons and followers were
   desirous to be esteemed honorable and noble, while their father was in
   obscurity, and was exposed also to all the reproaches of the world.

   11. For to this hour. The Apostle here describes his condition, as if
   in a picture, that the Corinthians may learn, from his example, to lay
   aside that loftiness of spirit, and embrace, as he did, the cross of
   Christ with meekness of spirit. He discovers the utmost dexterity in
   this respect, that in making mention of those things which had rendered
   him contemptible, he affords clear proof of his singular fidelity and
   indefatigable zeal for the advancement of the gospel; and, on the other
   hand, he tacitly reproves his rivals, who, while they had furnished no
   such proof, were desirous, nevertheless, to be held in the highest
   esteem. In the words themselves there is no obscurity, except that we
   must take notice of the distinction between those two participles --
   loidoroumenoi kai blasphemoumenoi (reviled and defamed.) As loidoria
   means -- that harsher sort of raillery, which does not merely give a
   person a slight touch, but a sharp bite, and blackens his character by
   open contumely, there can be no doubt that loidorein means -- wounding
   a person with reproach as with a sting. [241] I have accordingly
   rendered it -- harassed with revilings Blasphemia signifies a more open
   reproach, when any one is severely and atrociously slandered. [242]

   12. When he says that while persecuted he suffers it, and that he prays
   for his revilers, he intimates that he is not merely afflicted and
   abased by God, by means of the cross, but is also endowed with a
   disposition to abase himself willingly. In this, perhaps, he gives a
   stroke to the false apostles, who were so effeminate and tender, that
   they could not bear to be touched even with your little finger. In
   speaking of their laboring he adds -- with our own hands, to express
   more fully the meanness of his employments [243] -- "I do not merely
   gain a livelihood for myself by my own labor, but by mean labor,
   working with my own hands."

   13. As the execrations of the world. He makes use of two terms, the
   former of which denotes a man who, by public execrations, is devoted,
   with the view to the cleansing of a city, [244] for such persons, on
   the ground of their cleansing the rest of the people, by receiving in
   themselves whatever there is in the city of crimes, and heinous
   offense, are called by the Greeks sometimes katharmoi, but more
   frequently katharmata. [245] Paul, in adding the preposition peri
   (around) seems to have had an eye to the expiatory rite itself,
   inasmuch as those unhappy men who were devoted to execrations were led
   round through the streets, that they might carry away with them
   whatever there was of evil [246] in any corner, that the cleansing
   might be the more complete. The plural number might seem to imply that
   he speaks not of himself exclusively, but also of the others who were
   his associates, and who were not less held in contempt by the
   Corinthians. There is, however, no urgent reason for regarding what he
   says as extending to more than himself. The other term -- peripsema,
   (offscouring,) denotes filings or scrapings of any kind, and also the
   sweepings that are cleared away with a brush. [247] As to both terms
   consult the annotations of Budaeus. [248]

   In so far as concerns the meaning of the passage before us, Paul, with
   the view of expressing his extreme degradation, says that he is held in
   abomination by the whole world, like a man set apart for expiation,
   [249] and that, like offscourings, he is nauseous to all. At the same
   time he does not mean to say by the former comparison that he is all
   expiatory victim for sins, but simply means, that in respect of
   disgrace and reproaches he differs nothing from the man on whom the
   execrations of all are heaped up.

   14. I write not these things to shame you As the foregoing instances of
   irony were very pointed, so that they might exasperate the minds of the
   Corinthians, he now obviates that dissatisfaction by declaring, that he
   had not said these things with a view to cover them with shame, but
   rather to admonish them with paternal affection. It is indeed certain
   that this is the nature and tendency of a father's chastisement, to
   make his son feel ashamed; for the first token of return to a right
   state of mind is the shame which the son begins to feel on being
   reproached for his fault. The object, then, which the father has in
   view when he chastises his son with reproofs, is that he may bring him
   to be displeased with himself. And we see that the tendency of what
   Paul has said hitherto, is to make the Corinthians ashamed of
   themselves. Nay more, we shall find him a little afterwards (1
   Corinthians 6:5) declaring that he made mention of their faults in
   order that they may begin to be ashamed. Here, however, he simply means
   to intimate, that it was not his design to heap disgrace upon them, or
   to expose their sins publicly and openly with a view to their reproach.
   For he who admonishes in a friendly spirit, makes it his particular
   care that whatever there is of shame, may remain with the individual
   whom he admonishes, [250] and may in this manner be buried. On the
   other hand, the man who reproaches with a malignant disposition,
   inflicts disgrace upon the man whom he reproves for his fault, in such
   a manner as to hold him up to the reproach of all. Paul then simply
   affirms that what he had said, had been said by him, with no
   disposition to upbraid, or with any view to hurt their reputation, but,
   on the contrary, with paternal affection he admonished them as to what
   he saw to be defective in them.

   But what was the design of this admonition? It was that the
   Corinthians, who were puffed up with mere empty notions, might learn to
   glory, as he did, in the abasement of the cross, and might no longer
   despise him on those grounds on which he was deservedly honorable in
   the sight of God and angels -- in fine, that, laying aside their
   accustomed haughtiness, they might set a higher value on those marks
   [251] of Christ (Galatians 6:17) that were upon him, than on the empty
   and counterfeit show of the false apostles. Let teachers [252] infer
   from this, that in reproofs they must always use such moderation as not
   to wound men's minds with excessive severity, and that, agreeably to
   the common proverb, they must mix honey or oil with vinegar -- that
   they must above all things take care not to appear to triumph over
   those whom they reprove, or to take delight in their disgrace -- nay
   more, that they must endeavor to make it understood that they seek
   nothing but that their welfare may be promoted. For what good will the
   teacher [253] do by mere bawling, if he does not season the sharpness
   of his reproof by that moderation of which I have spoken? Hence if we
   are desirous to do any good by correcting men's faults, we must
   distinctly give them to know, that our reproofs proceed from a friendly
   disposition.

   15. For though you had ten thousand. He had called himself father, and
   now he shows that this title belongs to him peculiarly and specially,
   inasmuch as he alone has begotten them in Christ. In this comparison,
   however, he has an eye to the false apostles to whom the Corinthians
   showed all deference, so that Paul was now almost as nothing among
   them. Accordingly he admonishes them to consider what honor ought to be
   rendered to a father, and what to a pedagogue [254] "You entertain
   respect for those new teachers. To this I have no objection, provided
   you bear in mind that I am your father, while they are merely
   pedagogues." Now by claiming for himself authority, he intimates that
   he is actuated by a different kind of affection from that of those whom
   they so highly esteemed. "They take pains in instructing you. Be it so.
   Very different is the love of a father, very different his anxiety,
   very different his attachment from those of a pedagogue What if he
   should also make an allusion to that imperfection of faith [255] which
   he had previously found fault with? For while the Corinthians were
   giants in pride, they were children in faith, and are, therefore, with
   propriety, sent to pedagogues [256] He also reproves the absurd and
   base system of those teachers in keeping their followers in the mere
   first rudiments, with the view of keeping them always in bonds under
   their authority. [257]

   For in Christ Here we have the reason why he alone ought to be esteemed
   as the father of the Corinthian Church -- because he had begotten it.
   And truly it is in most appropriate terms that he here describes
   spiritual generation, when he says that he has begotten them in Christ,
   who alone is the life of the soul, and makes the gospel the formal
   cause. [258] Let us observe, then, that we are then in the sight of God
   truly begotten, when we are engrafted into Christ, out of whom there
   will be found nothing but death, and that this is effected by means of
   the gospel, because, while we are by nature flesh and hay, the word of
   God, as Peter (1 Peter 1:24, 25) teaches from Isaiah, (Isaiah 40:6, 7,
   8,) is the incorruptible seed by which we are renewed to eternal life.
   Take away the gospel, and we will all remain accursed and dead in the
   sight of God. That same word by which we are begotten is afterwards
   milk to us for nourishing us, and it is also solid food to sustain us
   for ever. [259]

   Should any one bring forward this objection, "As new sons are begotten
   to God in the Church every day, why does Paul say that those who
   succeeded him were not fathers?" the answer is easy -- that he is here
   speaking of the commencement of the Church. For although many had been
   begotten by the ministry of others, this honor remained to Paul
   untouched -- that he had founded the Corinthian Church. Should any one,
   again, ask, "Ought not all pastors to be reckoned fathers, and if so,
   why does Paul deprive all others of this title, so as to claim it for
   himself exclusively?" I answer -- "He speaks here comparatively."
   Hence, however the title of fathers might be applicable to them in
   other respects, yet in respect of Paul, they were merely instructors We
   must also keep in mind what I touched upon a little ago, that he is not
   speaking of all, (for as to those who were like himself, as, for
   example, Apollos, Silvanus, and Timotheus, who aimed at nothing but the
   advancement of Christ's kingdom, he would have had no objection to
   their being so named, and having the highest honor assigned to them,)
   but is reproving those who, by a misdirected ambition, transferred to
   themselves the glory that belonged to another. Of this sort were those
   who robbed Paul of the honor that was due to him, that they might set
   themselves off in his spoils.

   And, truly, the condition of the Church universal at this day is the
   same as that of the Corinthian Church was at that time. For how few are
   there that love the Churches with a fatherly, that is to say, a
   disinterested affection, and lay themselves out to promote their
   welfare! Meanwhile, there are very many pedagogues, who give out their
   services as hirelings, in such a manner as to discharge as it were a
   mere temporary office, and in the meantime hold the people in
   subjection and admiration. [260] At the same time, even in that case it
   is well when there are many pedagogues, who do good, at least, to some
   extent by teaching, and do not destroy the Church by the corruptions of
   false doctrine. For my part, when I complain of the multitude of
   pedagogues, I do not refer to Popish priests, (for I would not do them
   the honor of reckoning them in that number,) but those who, while
   agreeing with us in doctrine, employ themselves in taking care of their
   own affairs, rather than those of Christ. We all, it is true, wish to
   be reckoned fathers, and require from others the obedience of sons, but
   where is the man to be found who acts in such a manner as to show that
   he is a father? [261]

   There remains another question of greater difficulty: As Christ forbids
   us to

   call any one father upon earth, because we have one Father in heaven,
   (Matthew 23:9,)

   how does Paul dare to take to himself the name of father? I answer,
   that, properly speaking, God alone is the Father, not merely of our
   soul, but also of our flesh. As, however, in so far as concerns the
   body, he communicates the honor of his paternal name to those to whom
   he gives offspring, while, as to souls, he reserves to himself
   exclusively the right and title of Father, I confess that, on this
   account, he is called in a peculiar sense the Father of spirits, and is
   distinguished from earthly fathers, as the Apostle speaks in Hebrews
   12:9. As, however, notwithstanding that it is he alone who, by his own
   influence, begets souls, and regenerates and quickens them, he makes
   use of the ministry of his servants for this purpose, there is no harm
   in their being called fathers, in respect of this ministry, as this
   does not in any degree detract from the honor of God. The word, as I
   have said, is the spiritual seed. God alone by means of it regenerates
   our souls by his influence, but, at the same time, he does not exclude
   the efforts of ministers. If, therefore, you attentively consider, what
   God accomplishes by himself, and what he designs to be accomplished by
   ministers, you will easily understand in what sense he alone is worthy
   of the name of Father, and how far this name is applicable to his
   ministers, without any infringement upon his rights.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [234] "Et bien peu estimez;" -- "And very little esteemed."

   [235] "On pourmenoit par toute la ville les poures prisonniers;" --
   "They led the poor prisoners round the whole town."

   [236] "Condamnez a seruir de passe-temps en combatrant contre des
   bestes;" -- "Condemned to serve as a pastime in fighting against wild
   beasts."

   [237] "C'est une concession ironique, c'est a dire, qu'il accorde ce
   dont ils se vantoyent, mais c'est par mocquerie, comme s'il disoit;" --
   "It is an ironical concession; that is to say -- he grants what they
   boast of, but it is in mockery, as though he had said."

   [238] "En faisant profession de l'Euangile, vous voulez auec cela estre
   estimez prudens;" -- "In making a profession of the gospel, you wish,
   along with that, to be esteemed wise."

   [239] "Pour l'amour de vous;" -- "From love to you."

   [240] "Est d'autant plus picquante, et aigre;" -- "Is so much the more
   cutting and severe."

   [241] loidoria, is supposed by Eustathius to be derived from logos, a
   word, and doru, a spear A similar figure is employed by the Psalmist,
   when he speaks of words that are drawn swords (Psalm 55:21.) -- Ed

   [242] "Or le premier signifie non seulement se gaudir d'vn homme, mais
   aussi toucher son honneur comme en le blasonnant, et le naurer en
   termes picquans: ce que nous disons communement, Mordre en riant. Le
   second signifie quand on detracte apertement de quelqu'vn sans vser de
   couuerture de paroles;" -- "Now the first means not simply to make
   one's self merry at another's expense, but also to touch his
   reputation, as if with the view of blackening it, and wounding it by
   cutting expressions, as we commonly say -- to give a good humored bite.
   The second means when persons slander any one openly, without using any
   disguise of words."

   [243] "Que c'estoit vn mestier ville, et mechanique;" -- "That it was a
   mean and mechanical occupation."

   [244] "Comme c'estoit vne chose qui se faisoit anciennement entre les
   payens;" -- "As this was a thing that was practiced anciently among the
   heathens."

   [245] The Scholiast on Aristophanes, Plut. 454, gives the following
   explanation of the term katharma: Katharmata elegonto hoi epi to
   katharsei loimou tinos etinos hetera; nasou thuomenoi tois theois.
   Touto de ethos kai para romaiois epekratese. Those were called
   cleansings who were sacrificed to the gods for the cleansing out of
   some famine, or some other calamity. This custom prevailed also among
   the Romans. -- Ed

   [246] "De malediction;" -- "Of curse."

   [247] "Les ballieures d'vne maison;" -- "The sweepings of a house."

   [248] The view given by Budaeus of the former term (perikatharmata) is
   stated by Leigh in his Critica Sacra to be the following: That "the
   Apostle had allusion unto the expiations in use among the heathens, in
   time of any pestilence or contagious infection; for the removal of such
   diseases they then sacrificed certain men unto their gods, which men
   they termed katharmata. As if the Apostle had said -- We are as
   despicable and as odious in the sight of the people, as much loaded
   with the revilings and cursings of the multitude, as those condemned
   persons who were offered up by way of public expiation." The latter
   term (peripsema) Budaeus renders as follows: "Scobem aut ramentum et
   quicquid limando fleter;" -- "Filings or scrapings, or whatever is
   cleared off by filing." -- Ed

   [249] "Destine a porter toutes les execrations et maudissons du monde;"
   -- "Set apart to bear all the execrations and curses of the world."

   [250] "Tasche sur toutes choses que toute la honte demeure entre lui et
   celui lequel il admoneste;" -- "Endeavors above all things that the
   shame may remain between him and the person whom he admonishes."

   [251] "Les marques et fietrisseurs de Christ en luy;" -- "The marks and
   brands of Christ in him." The allusion, as our Author himself remarks,
   when [8]commenting upon Galatians 6:17, is to "the marks with which
   barbarian slaves, or fugitives, or malefactors were branded." Hence the
   expression of Juvenal: stigmate dignum credere -- "to reckon one worthy
   of being branded as a slave." (Juv. 10. 183.) -- Ed.

   [252] "Les docteurs et ministres;" -- "Teachers and ministers."

   [253] "Le ministre:" -- "The minister."

   [254] "The Greek word pedagogue," says Calmet, "now carries with it an
   idea approaching to contempt. With no other word to qualify it, it
   excites the idea of a pedant, who assumes an air of authority over
   others, which does not belong to him. But among the ancients a
   pedagogue was a person to whom they committed the care of their
   children, to lead them, to observe them, and to instruct them in their
   first rudiments. Thus the office of a pedagogue nearly answered to that
   of a governor or tutor, who constantly attends his pupil, teaches him,
   and forms his manners. Paul (1 Corinthians 4:15) says: "For though you
   have ten thousand instructors (pedagogues) in Christ, yet have ye not
   many fathers' -- representing himself as their father in the faith,
   since he had begotten them in the gospel. The pedagogue, indeed, may
   have some power and interest in his pupil, but he can never have the
   natural tenderness of a father for him." -- Ed.

   [255] "Quel mal y auroit-il, quand nous dirions, qu'il fait aussi vne
   allusion a ceste petitesse et enfance en la foy?" -- "What harm were
   there, though we should say that he also makes an allusion to that
   littleness and childhood in the faith?"

   [256] Our Author evidently alludes to the etymology of the original
   term paidagogous, as being derived from pais, a boy, and ago, to lead
   Such instructors were generally slaves, whose business it was to attend
   upon their youthful charge, to observe their behavior, and to lead them
   to and from school. (Herod. 8. 75, Eur. Ion, 725.) -- Ed

   [257] "La mauuaise procedure et faqon d'enseigner des docteurs,
   d'autant qu'ils amusoyent leurs disciples aux premiers rudimens et
   petis commencemens, et les tenoyent tousiours la;" -- "The base
   procedure and method of instruction of the teachers, inasmuch as they
   amused their followers with the first rudiments and little beginnings,
   and kept them constantly there."

   [258] "Qu'on appelle;" -- "As they call it."

   [259] Our Author probably refers to what he had said when [9]commenting
   on 1 Corinthians 3:2.

   [260] "Qui se loent, comme ouuriers a la iournee, pour exercer l'office
   a leur profit, ainsi qu'on feroit vne chose qu'on aura prise pour vn
   temps certain, et cependant, tenir le peuple en obeissance, et acquerir
   bruit, ou estre en admiration enuers iceluy;" -- "Who hire themselves
   out, as workmen for the day, in order to exercise the office to their
   own advantage, as if one were doing a thing that he had taken up for a
   certain time, and in the meantime to hold the people in subjection, and
   acquire fame, or be in admiration among them."

   [261] "Combien yen a-t-il qui facent office de pere, et qui demonstrent
   par effet ce qu'ils vetdent estre appelez?" -- "How many are there of
   them that discharge the office of a father, and show in deeds what they
   wish to be called?"
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 4:16-21

   16. Wherefore I beseech you, be ye followers of me.

   16. Adhortor ergo vos, imitatores mei estote.

   17. For this cause have I sent unto you Timotheus, who is my beloved
   son, and faithful in the Lord, who shall bring you into remembrance of
   my ways which be in Christ, as I teach every where in every church.

   17. Hac de causa misi ad vos Timotheum, qui est filius meus dilectus et
   fidelis in Domino: qui vobis in memoriam reducat vias meas, quae sunt
   in Christo, quemadmodum ubique in omnibus Ecclesiis doceam.

   18. Now some are puffed up, as though I would not come to you.

   18. Perinde quasi non sum ad vos venturus, inflati sunt quidam:

   19. But I will come to you shortly, if the Lord will, and will know,
   not the speech of them which are puffed up, but the power.

   19. Veniam autem brevi ad vos, si Dominus voluerit, et cognoscam non
   sermonem eorum qui sunt inflati, sed virtutem.

   20. For the kingdom of God is not in word, but in power.

   20. Neque enim in sermone regnum Dei est, sed in virtute.

   21. What will ye? shall I come unto you with a rod, or in love, and in
   the spirit of meekness?

   21. Quid vultis? in virga veniam ad vos, an in dilectione spirituque
   mansuetudinis?


   16. I exhort you. He now expresses also, in his own words, what he
   requires from them in his fatherly admonition -- that, being his sons,
   they do not degenerate from their father. For what is more reasonable
   than that sons endeavor to be as like as possible to their father.
   [262] At the same time he gives up something in respect of his own
   right, when he exhorts them to this, by way of entreaty rather than of
   command. But to what extent he wishes them to be imitators of him, he
   shows elsewhere, when he adds, as he was of Christ (1 Corinthians
   11:1.) This limitation must always be observed, so as not to follow any
   man, except in so far as he leads us to Christ. We know what he is here
   treating of. The Corinthians did not merely shun the abasement of the
   cross, but they also regarded their father with contempt, on this
   account, that, forgetting earthly glory, he gloried rather in
   reproaches for Christ; and they reckoned themselves and others
   fortunate in having nothing contemptible according to the flesh. He
   accordingly admonishes them to devote themselves, after his example, to
   the service of Christ, so as to endure all things patiently.

   17. For this cause. The meaning is: "That you may know what my manner
   of life is, and whether I am worthy to be imitated, listen to what
   Timothy has to say, who will be prepared to be a faithful witness of
   these things. Now as there are two things that secure credit to a man's
   testimony -- a knowledge of the things which he relates, and fidelity
   -- he lets them know that Timothy possesses both of these things. For
   in calling him his dearly beloved son, he intimates that he knew him
   intimately, and was acquainted with all his affairs; and farther, he
   speaks of him as faithful in the Lord He gives also two things in
   charge to Timothy -- first, to recall to the recollection of the
   Corinthians those things which they should of themselves have had in
   remembrance, and in this he tacitly reproves them; and secondly, to
   testify to them, how uniform and steady his manner of teaching was in
   every place. Now it is probable that he had been assailed by the
   calumnies of the false apostles, as though he assumed more authority
   over the Corinthians than he did over others, or as though he conducted
   himself in a very different way in other places; for it is not without
   good reason that he wishes this to be testified to them. It is then the
   part of a prudent minister so to regulate his procedure, and to observe
   such a method of instruction, that no such objection may be brought
   against him, but he shall be prepared to answer on the same ground as
   Paul does.

   18. As though I would not come to you This is the custom of the false
   apostles -- to take advantage of the absence of the good, that they may
   triumph and vaunt without any hindrance. Paul, accordingly, with the
   view of reproving their ill-regulated conscience, and repressing their
   insolence, tells them, that they cannot endure his presence. It happens
   sometimes, it is true, that wicked men, on finding opportunity of
   insulting, rise up openly with an iron front against the servants of
   Christ, but never do they come forward ingenuously to an equal combat,
   [263] but on the contrary, by sinister artifices they discover their
   want of confidence.

   19. But I will come shortly. "They are in a mistake," says he, "in
   raising their crests during my absence, as though this were to be of
   long duration, for they shall in a short time perceive how vain their
   confidence has been." He has it not, however, so much in view to
   terrify them, as though he would on his arrival thunder forth against
   them, but rather presses and bears down upon their consciences, for,
   however they might disguise it, they were aware that he was furnished
   with divine influence.

   The clause, if the Lord will, intimates, that we ought not to promise
   anything to others as to the future, or to determine with ourselves,
   without adding this limitation in so far as the Lord will permit Hence
   James with good reason derides the rashness of mankind (James 4:15) in
   planning what they are to do ten years afterwards, while they have not
   security for living even a single hour. We are not, it is true, bound
   by a constant necessity to the use of such forms of expression, but it
   is the better way to accustom ourselves carefully to them, that we may
   exercise our minds from time to time in this consideration -- that all
   our plans must be in subjection to the will of God.

   And I will know not the speech By speech you must understand that
   prating in which the false apostles delighted themselves, for they
   excelled in a kind of dexterity and gracefulness of speech, while they
   were destitute of the zeal and efficacy of the Spirit. By the term
   power, he means that spiritual efficacy, with which those are endowed
   who dispense the word of the Lord with earnestness. [264] The meaning,
   therefore, is: "I shall see whether they have so much occasion for
   being puffed up; and I shall not judge of them by their mere outward
   talkativeness, in which they place the sum-total [265] of their glory,
   and on the ground of which they claim for themselves every honor. If
   they wish to have any honor from me, they must bring forward that power
   which distinguishes the true servants of Christ from the merely
   pretended: otherwise I shall despise them, with all their show. It is
   to no purpose, therefore, that they confide in their eloquence, for I
   shall reckon it nothing better than smoke."

   20. For the kingdom of God is not in word As the Lord governs the
   Church by his word, as with a scepter, the administration of the gospel
   is often called the kingdom of God Here, then, we are to understand by
   the kingdom of God whatever tends in this direction, and is appointed
   for this purpose -- that God may reign among us. He says that this
   kingdom does not consist in word, for how small an affair is it for any
   one to have skill to prate eloquently, while he has nothing but empty
   tinkling. [266] Let us know, then, a mere outward gracefulness and
   dexterity in teaching is like a body that is elegant and of a beautiful
   color, while the power of which Paul here speaks is like the soul. We
   have already seen that the preaching of the gospel is of such a nature,
   that it is inwardly replete with a kind of solid majesty. This majesty
   shows itself, when a minister strives by means of power rather than of
   speech -- that is, when he does not place confidence in his own
   intellect, or eloquence, but, furnished with spiritual armor,
   consisting of zeal for maintaining the Lord's honor -- eagerness for
   the raising up of Christ's kingdom -- a desire to edify -- the fear of
   the Lord -- an invincible constancy -- purity of conscience, and other
   necessary endowments, he applies himself diligently to the Lord's work.
   Without this, preaching is dead, and has no strength, with whatever
   beauty it may be adorned. Hence in his second epistle, he says, that in
   Christ nothing avails but a new creature (2 Corinthians 5:17) -- a
   statement which is to the same purpose. For he would have us not rest
   in outward masks, but depend solely on the internal power of the Holy
   Spirit.

   But while in these words he represses the ambition of the false
   apostles, he at the same time reproves the Corinthians for their
   perverted judgment, in measuring the servants of Christ by what holds
   the lowest place among their excellences. Here we have a remarkable
   statement, and one that is not less applicable to us than to them. As
   to our gospel, of which we are proud, [267] where is it in most persons
   except in the tongue? Where is newness of life? Where is spiritual
   efficacy? Nor is it so among the people merely. [268] On the contrary,
   how many there are, who, while endeavoring to procure favor and
   applause from the gospel, as though it were some profane science, aim
   at nothing else than to speak with elegance and refinement! I do not
   approve of restricting the term power to miracles, for from the
   contrast we may readily gather that it has a more extensive import.

   21. What will ye? The person who divided the Epistles into chapters
   ought to have made this the beginning of the fifth chapter. For having
   hitherto reproved the foolish pride of the Corinthians, their vain
   confidence, and their judgment as perverted and corrupted by ambition,
   he now makes mention of the vices with which they were infected, and on
   account of which they ought to be ashamed -- "You are puffed up, as
   though everything were on the best possible footing among you, but it
   were better if you did with shame and sighing acknowledge the
   unhappiness of your condition, for if you persist, I shall be under the
   necessity of laying aside mildness, and exercising towards you a
   paternal severity." There is, however, still more of emphasis in this
   threatening in which he gives them liberty to choose, for he declares
   that it does not depend upon himself whether he shall show himself
   agreeable and mild, but that it is their own fault that he is
   necessitated to use severity. "It is for you," says he, "to choose in
   what temper you would have me. As for me, I am prepared to be mild, but
   if you go on as you have done hitherto, I shall be under the necessity
   of taking up the rod." He thus takes higher ground, after having laid
   claim to fatherly authority over them, for it would have been absurd to
   set out with this threatening, without first opening up the way by what
   he said, and preparing them for entertaining fears.

   By the term rod, he means that severity with which a pastor ought to
   correct his people's faults. He places in contrast with this, love, and
   the spirit of meekness -- not, as though the father hated the sons whom
   he chastises, for on the contrary the chastisement proceeds from love,
   but because by sadness of countenance and harshness of words, he
   appears as though he were angry with his son. To express myself more
   plainly -- in one word, a father always, whatever kind of look he may
   put on, regards his son with affection, but that affection he manifests
   when he teaches him pleasantly and lovingly; but when, on the other
   hand, being displeased with his faults, he chastises him in rather
   sharp terms, or even with the rod, he puts on the appearance of a
   person in a passion. As then love does not appear when severity of
   discipline is exercised, it is not without good reason, that Paul here
   conjoins love with a spirit of meekness There are some that understand
   the term rod to mean excommunication -- but, for my part, though I
   grant them that excommunication is a part of that severity with which
   Paul threatens the Corinthians, I at the same time extend it farther,
   so as to include all reproofs that are of a harsher kind.

   Observe here what system a good pastor ought to observe; for he ought
   of his own accord to be inclined to mildness, with the view of drawing
   to Christ, rather than driving. This mildness, so far as in him lies,
   he ought to maintain, and never have recourse to bitterness, unless he
   be compelled to do so. On the other hand, he must not spare the rod,
   (Proverbs 13:24,) when there is need for it, for while those that are
   teachable and agreeable should be dealt with mildly, sharpness requires
   to be used in dealing with the refractory and contumacious. We see,
   too, that the Word of God does not contain mere doctrine, but contains
   an intermixture of bitter reproofs, so as to supply pastors with a rod
   For it often happens, through the obstinacy of the people, that those
   pastors who are naturally the mildest [269] are constrained to put on,
   as it were, the countenance of another, and act with rigor and
   severity.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [262] "Taschent a suyure les bonnes moeurs de lears peres;" --
   "Endeavor to follow the good manners of their fathers."

   [263] "Si est-ce que jamais ils ne vienent a combatre franchement, et
   s' ils ne voyent leur auantage: mats plustot en vsant de ruses et
   circuits obliques, ils monstrent leur deffiance, et comment ils sont
   mal asseurez;" -- "So it is, that they never come forward frankly to a
   combat, and unless they have a view to their own advantage; but on the
   contrary, by making use of tricks and indirect windings, they show
   their want of confidence, and how distrustful they are."

   [264] "D'vn bon zele, et pure affection;" -- "With a right zeal and a
   pure affection."

   [265] "Proram et puppim;" -- "Prow and stern."

   [266] "Sqaura bien babiller et parler eloquemment, et cependant il
   n'aura rien qu'vn son retentissant en l'air;" -- "Has skill to prate
   well, and speak eloquently, and in the meantime has nothing but a sound
   tinkling in the air."

   [267] "Duquel nous nous vantons et glorifions tant;" -- "Of which we
   boast and glory so much."

   [268] "Et ce n'est point au peuple seulement qu'est ce defaut;" -- "And
   it is not among the people merely that this defect exists."

   [269] "Qu'on pourra trouuer;" -- "That one could find."
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 5
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 5:1-5

   1. It is reported commonly that there is fornication among you, and
   such fornication as is not so much named among the Gentiles, that one
   should have his father's wife.

   1. Omnino auditur in vobus scortatio, et talis scortatio, quae ne
   interGentes quidem nominatur, ut quis as uxorem patris habeat.

   2. And ye are puffed up, and have not rather mourned, that he that hath
   done this deed might be taken away from among you.

   2. Et vos inflati estis, ac non magis luxistis, ut e medio vestri
   removeretur, qui facinus hoc admisit.

   3. For I verily, as absent in body, but present in spirit, have judged
   already, as though I were present, concerning him that hath so done
   this deed,

   3. Ego quidem certe tanquam absens corpore, praesens autem spiritu, jam
   iudicavi tanquam praesens, qui hoc ita designavit,

   4. In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together,
   and my spirit, with the power our Lord Jesus Christ,

   4. In nomine Domini nostri Iesu Christi, congregatis vobis et spiritu
   meo, cum potentia Domini nostri of Iesu Christi, eiusmodi inquam
   hominem.

   5. To deliver such an one unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh,
   that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.

   5. Tradere Satanae in exitium carnis, ut spiritus salvus fiat in die
   Domini Iesu.


   1. It is generally reported that there is among you. Those contentions
   having originated, as has been observed, in presumption and excessive
   confidence, he most appropriately proceeds to make mention of their
   diseases, the knowledge of which should have the effect of humbling
   them. First of all, he shows them what enormous wickedness it is to
   allow one of their society to have an illicit connection with his
   mother-in-law. It is not certain, whether he had seduced her from his
   father as a prostitute, or whether he kept her under pretense of
   marriage. This, however, does not much affect, the subject in hand;
   for, as in the former case, there would have been an abominable and
   execrable whoredom, so the latter would have involved an incestuous
   connection, abhorrent to all propriety and natural decency. Now, that
   he may not seem to charge them on doubtful suspicions, he says, that
   the case which he brings forward is well known and in general
   circulation. For it is in this sense that I take the particle holos
   (generally) as intimating that it was no vague rumor, but a matter well
   known, and published everywhere so as to cause great scandal.

   From his saying that such a kind of whoredom was not named even among
   the Gentiles, some are of opinion, that he refers to the incest of
   Reuben, (Genesis 35:22,) who, in like manner, had an incestuous
   connection with his mother-in-law. They are accordingly of opinion,
   that Paul did not make mention of Israel, because a disgraceful
   instance of this kind had occurred among them, as if the annals of the
   Gentiles did not record many incestuous connections of that kind! This,
   then, is an idea that is quite foreign to Paul's intention; for in
   making mention of the Gentiles rather than of the Jews, he designed
   rather to heighten the aggravation of the crime. "You," says he,
   "permit, as though it were a lawful thing, an enormity, which would not
   be tolerated even among the Gentiles -- nay more, has always been
   regarded by them with horror, and looked upon as a prodigy of crime."
   When, therefore, he affirms that it was not named among the Gentiles,
   he does not mean by this, that no such thing had ever existed among
   them, or was not recorded in their annals, for even tragedies have been
   founded upon it; [270] but that it was held in detestation by the
   Gentiles, as a shameful and abominable monstrosity, for it is a beastly
   lust, which destroys even natural modesty. Should any one ask, "Is it
   just to reproach all with the sin of one individual?" I answer, that
   the Corinthians are accused, not because one of their number has
   sinned, but because, as is stated afterwards, they encouraged by
   connivance a crime that was deserving of the severest punishment.

   2. And ye are puffed up "Are ye not ashamed," says he, "to glory in
   what affords so much occasion for humiliation?" He had observed
   previously, that even the highest excellence gives no just ground of
   glorying, inasmuch as mankind have nothing of their own, and it is only
   through the grace of God that they possess any excellence. (1
   Corinthians 4:7.) Now, however, he attacks them from another quarter.
   "You are," says he, "covered with disgrace: what ground have you, then,
   for pride or haughtiness? For there is an amazing blindness in glorying
   in the midst of disgrace, in spite, as it were of angels and men."

   When he says, and have not rather mourned, he argues by way of
   contrast; for where there is grief there is no more glorying. It may be
   asked: "Why ought they to have mourned over another man's sin?" I
   answer, for two reasons: first, in consequence of the communion that
   exists among the members of the Church, it was becoming that all should
   feel hurt at so deadly a fall on the part of one of their number; and
   secondly, when such an enormity is perpetrated in a particular Church,
   the perpetrator of it is all offender in such a way, that the whole
   society is in a manner polluted. For as God humbles the father of a
   family in the disgrace of his wife, or of his children, and a whole
   kindred in the disgrace of one of their number, so every Church ought
   to consider, that it contracts a stain of disgrace whenever any base
   crime is perpetrated in it. Nay, farther, we see how the anger of God
   was kindled against the whole nation of Israel on account of the
   sacrilege of one individual -- Achan. (Joshua 7:1.) It was not as
   though God had been so cruel as to take vengeance on the innocent for
   another man's crime; but, as in every instance in which anything of
   this nature has occurred among a people, there is already some token of
   his anger, so by correcting a community for the fault of one
   individual, he distinctly intimates that the whole body is infected and
   polluted with the contagion of the offense. Hence we readily infer,
   that it is the duty of every Church to mourn over the faults of
   individual members, as domestic calamities belonging to the entire
   body. And assuredly a pious and dutiful correction takes its rise in
   our being inflamed with holy zeal through displeasure at the offense;
   for otherwise severity will be felt to be bitter. [271]

   That he might be taken away from among you. He now brings out more
   distinctly what he finds fault with in the Corinthians -- remissness,
   inasmuch as they connived at such an abomination. Hence, too, it
   appears that Churches are furnished with this power [272] -- that,
   whatever fault there is within them, they can correct or remove it by
   strictness of discipline, and that those are inexcusable that are not
   on the alert to have filth cleared away. For Paul here condemns the
   Corinthians. Why? Because they had been remiss in the punishment of one
   individual. Now he would have accused them unjustly, if they had not
   had this power. Hence the power of excommunication is established from
   this passage. On the other hand, as Churches have this mode of
   punishment put into their hands, those commit sin, [273] as Paul shows
   here, that do not make use of it, when it is required; for otherwise he
   would act unfairly to the Corinthians in charging them with this fault.

   3. I truly, etc. As the Corinthians were wanting in their duty, having
   condemned their negligence, he now shows what ought to be done. In
   order that this stain may be removed, they must cast out this
   incestuous person from the society of the faithful. He prescribes,
   then, as a remedy for the disease, excommunication, which they had
   sinfully delayed so long. When he says, that he had, while absent in
   body, already determined this, he severely reproves in this way the
   remissness of the Corinthians, for there is here all implied contrast.
   It is as though he had said: "You who are present ought before this
   time to have applied a remedy to this disease, having it every day
   before your eyes, and yet you do nothing; [274] while for my part I
   cannot, even though absent, endure it." Lest any one should allege that
   he acted rashly in forming a judgment when at so great a distance, he
   declares himself to be present in spirit, meaning by this, that the
   line of duty was as plain to him as if he were present, and saw the
   thing with his eyes. Now it is of importance to observe what he teaches
   as to the mode of excommunication.

   4. When you are gathered together and my spirit -- that is, when ye are
   gathered together with me, but in spirit, for they could not meet
   together as to bodily presence. He declares, however, that it would be
   all one as though he were personally present. It is to be carefully
   observed, that Paul, though an Apostle, does not himself, as an
   individual, excommunicate according to his own pleasure, but consults
   with the Church, that the matter may be transacted by common authority.
   He, it is true, takes the lead, and shows the way, but, in taking
   others as his associates, he intimates with sufficient plainness, that
   this authority does not belong to any one individual. As, however, a
   multitude never accomplishes anything with moderation or seriousness,
   if not governed by counsel, there was appointed in the ancient Church a
   Presbytery, [275] that is, an assembly of elders, who, by the consent
   of all, had the power of first judging in the case. From them the
   matter was brought before the people, but it was as a thing already
   judged of. [276] Whatever the matter may be, it is quite contrary to
   the appointment of Christ and his Apostles -- to the order of the
   Church, and even to equity itself, that this right should be put into
   the hands of any one man, of excommunicating at his pleasure any that
   he may choose. Let us take notice, then, that in excommunicating this
   limitation be observed -- that this part of discipline be exercised by
   the common counsel of the elders, and with the consent of the people,
   and that this is a remedy in opposition to tyranny. For nothing is more
   at variance with the discipline of Christ than tyranny, for which you
   open a wide door, if you give one man the entire power.

   In the name of our Lord For it is not enough that we assemble, if it be
   not in the name of Christ; for even the wicked assemble together for
   impious and nefarious conspiracies. Now in order that an assembly may
   be held in Christ's name, two things are requisite: first, that we
   begin by calling upon his name; and secondly, that nothing is attempted
   but in conformity with his word. Then only do men make an auspicious
   commencement of anything that they take in hand to do, when they with
   their heart call upon the Lord that they may be governed by his Spirit,
   and that their plans may, by his grace, be directed to a happy issue;
   and farther, when they ask at his mouth, as the Prophet speaks, (Isaiah
   30:2,) that is to say, when, after consulting his oracles, they
   surrender themselves and all their designs to his will in unreserved
   obedience. If this is becoming even in the least of our actions, how
   much less ought it to be omitted in important and serious matters, and
   least of all, when we have to do with God's business rather than our
   own? For example, excommunication is an ordinance of God, and not of
   men; on any occasion, therefore, on which we are to make use of it,
   where shall we begin if not with God. [277] In short, when Paul exhorts
   the Corinthians to assemble in the name of Christ, he does not simply
   require them to make use of Christ's name, or to confess him with the
   mouth, (for the wicked themselves can do that,) but to seek him truly
   and with the heart, and farther, he intimates by this the seriousness
   and importance of the action.

   He adds, with the power of our Lord, for if the promise is true,

   As often as two or three are gathered together in my name,
   I am in the midst of them, (Matthew 18:20,)

   it follows, that whatever is done in such an assembly is a work of
   Christ. Hence we infer, of what importance excommunication, rightly
   administered, is in the sight of God, inasmuch as it rests upon the
   power of God. For that saying, too, must be accomplished,

   Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven. (Matthew
   18:18.)

   As, however, this statement ought to fill despisers [278] with no
   ordinary alarm, so faithful pastors, as well as the Churches generally,
   are by this admonished in what a devout spirit [279] they should go to
   work in a matter of such importance. For it is certain that the power
   of Christ is not tied to the inclination or opinions of mankind, but is
   associated with his eternal truth.

   5. To deliver to Satan for the destruction of the flesh. As the
   Apostles had been furnished with this power among others, that they
   could deliver over to Satan wicked and obstinate persons, and made use
   of him as a scourge to correct them, Chrysostom, and those that follow
   him, view these words of Paul as referring to a chastisement of that
   kind, agreeably to the exposition that is usually given of another
   passage, in reference to Alexander and Hymeneus, (1 Timothy 1:20.) To
   deliver over to Satan, they think, means nothing but the infliction of
   a severe punishment upon the body. But when I examine the whole context
   more narrowly, and at the same time compare it with what is stated in
   the Second Epistle, I give up that interpretation, as forced and at
   variance with Paul's meaning, and understand it simply of
   excommunication. For delivering over to Satan is an appropriate
   expression for denoting excommunication; for as Christ reigns in the
   Church, so Satan reigns out of the Church, as Augustine, too, has
   remarked, [280] in his sixty-eighth sermon on the words of the Apostle,
   where he explains this passage. [281] As, then, we are received into
   the communion of the Church, and remain in it on this condition, that
   we are under the protection and guardianship of Christ, I say, that he
   who is cast out of the Church is in a manner delivered over to the
   power of Satan, for he becomes an alien, and is cast out of Christ's
   kingdom.

   The clause that follows, for the destruction of the flesh, is made use
   of for the purpose of softening; for Paul's meaning is not that the
   person who is chastised is given over to Satan to be utterly ruined, or
   so as to be given up to the devil in perpetual bondage, but that it is
   a temporary condemnation, and not only so, but of such a nature as will
   be salutary. For as the salvation equally with the condemnation of the
   spirit is eternal, he takes the condemnation of the flesh as meaning
   temporal condemnation. "We will condemn him in this world for a time,
   that the Lord may preserve him in his kingdom." This furnishes an
   answer to the objection, by which some endeavor to set aside this
   exposition, for as the sentence of excommunication is directed rather
   against the soul than against the outward man, they inquire how it can
   be called the destruction of the flesh My answer, then, is, (as I have
   already in part stated,) that the destruction of the flesh is opposed
   to the salvation of the spirit, simply because the former is temporal
   and the latter is eternal. In this sense the Apostle in Hebrews 5:7,
   uses the expression the days of Christ's flesh, to mean the course of
   his mortal life. Now the Church in chastising offenders with severity,
   spares them not in this world, in order that God may spare them. [282]
   Should any one wish to have anything farther in reference to the rite
   of excommunication, its causes, necessity, purposes, and limitation,
   let him consult my Institutes. [283]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [270] Calvin probably had in his eye, among other instances, the
   Oedipus Tyrannus of Sophocles -- Ed.

   [271] "Et ne profitera pas;" -- "And will do no good."

   [272] "Et authorite;" -- "And authority."

   [273] "Offensent Dieu;" -- "Offend God."

   [274] "Vous dissimulez;" -- "You connive."

   [275] "Qu'on appeloit le Presbytere;" -- "What they called a
   Presbytery."

   [276] "Puis apres la chose estoit renuoyee au peuple par eux, avec un
   advertissement touteffois de ce qui leur en sembloit;" -- "The matter
   was afterwards brought by them before the people, with an intimation,
   however, of their views respecting it." See Calvin's Institutes, volume
   3, pp. 233-5. -- Ed.

   [277] "Le nom de Dieu;" -- "The name of God."

   [278] "Contempteurs de Dieu;" -- "Despisers of God."

   [279] "En quelle crainte et obeissance: -- "With what fear and
   obedience."

   [280] "L'a tres-bien note;" -- "Has very well remarked."

   [281] "The reader will find the same sentiment quoted in the
   Institutes, volume 3. -- Ed.

   [282] "Mais c'est afin que Dieu leur espargne;" -- "But it is in order
   that God may spare them."

   [283] See Institutes, volume 3.
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 5:6-8

   6. Your glorying is not good. Know ye not that a little leaven
   leaveneth the whole lump?

   6. Non est bona gloriatio vestra: an nescitis, quod exiguum fermentum
   totam massam fermentat?

   7. Purge out therefore the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, as ye
   are unleavened. For even Christ our passover is sacrificed for us.

   7. Expurgate ergo vetus fermentum, ut sitis nova conspersio, sicut
   estis azymi: nam Pascha nostrum pro nobis immolatum est, Christus.
   [284]

   8. Therefore let us keep the feast, not with old leaven, neither with
   the leaven of malice and wickedness; but with the unleavened bread of
   sincerity and truth.

   8. Proinde epulemur non in fermento veteri, neque in fermento malitiae
   et pravitatis, sed in azymis sinceritatis veritatis. [285]


   6. Your glorying is not good. He condemns their glorying, not simply
   because they extolled themselves beyond what is lawful for man, but
   because they delighted themselves in their faults. He had previously
   stripped mankind of all glory; for he had shown that, as they have
   nothing of their own, whatever excellence they may have, they owe the
   entire praise of it to God alone. (1 Corinthians 4:7.) What he treats
   of here, however, is not that, God is defrauded of his right, when
   mortals arrogate to themselves the praise of their excellences, but
   that the Corinthians are guilty of arrant folly in extolling themselves
   without any just ground. For they proudly gloried as if everything had
   been in a golden style among them, while in the meantime there was so
   much among them that was wicked and disgraceful.

   Know ye not That they might not think that it was a matter of little or
   no importance that they gave encouragement to so great an evil, he
   shows the destructive tendency of indulgence and dissimulation in such
   a case. He makes use of a proverbial saying, by which he intimates that
   a whole multitude is infected by the contagion of a single individual.
   For this proverb has in this passage [286] the same meaning as in those
   expressions of Juvenal: "A whole herd of swine falls down in the fields
   through disease in one of their number, and one discolored grape
   infects another." [287] I have said in this passage, because Paul, as
   we shall see, makes use of it elsewhere (Galatians 5:9) in another
   sense.

   7. Purge out therefore Having borrowed a similitude from leaven, he
   pursues it farther, though he makes a transition from a particular
   point to a general doctrine. For he is no longer speaking of the case
   of incest, but exhorts them generally to purity of life, on the ground
   that we cannot remain in Christ if we are not cleansed. He is
   accustomed to do this not infrequently. When he has made a particular
   statement, he takes occasion to pass on to general exhortations. He had
   made mention of leaven on another account, as we have seen. As this
   same metaphor suited the general doctrine which he now subjoins, he
   extends it farther.

   Our Passover [288] Before coming to the subject-matter, I shall say a
   few words in reference to the words. Old leaven receives that name on
   the same principle as the old man, (Romans 6:6,) for the corruption of
   nature takes the precedence in us, previously to our being renewed in
   Christ. That, therefore, is said to be old which we bring with us from
   the womb, and must perish when we are renewed by the grace of the
   Spirit. [289] The verb etuthe, which occurs between the name Christ and
   the term which denotes a sacrifice, [290] may refer to either. I have
   taken it as referring to the sacrifice, though this is of no great
   importance, as the meaning is not affected. The verb heortazomen, which
   Erasmus rendered "Let us celebrate the feast," signifies also to
   partake of the solemn feast which was observed after the sacrifice had
   been offered up. This interpretation appeared to suit better with the
   passage before us. I have, accordingly, followed the Vulgate in
   preference to Erasmus, as this rendering is more in accordance with the
   mystery of which Paul treats.

   We come now to the subject-matter. Paul, having it in view to exhort
   the Corinthians to holiness, shows that what was of old figuratively
   represented in the passover, ought to be at this day accomplished in
   us, and explains the correspondence which exists between the figure and
   the reality. In the first place, as the passover consisted of two parts
   -- a sacrifice and a sacred feast -- he makes mention of both. For
   although some do not reckon the paschal lamb to have been a sacrifice,
   yet reason shows that it was properly a sacrifice, for in that rite the
   people were reconciled to God by the sprinkling of blood. Now there is
   no reconciliation without a sacrifice; and, besides, the Apostle now
   expressly confirms if, for he makes use of the word thuesthai, which is
   applicable to sacrifices, and in other respects, too, the context would
   not correspond. The lamb, then, was sacrificed yearly; then followed a
   feast, the celebration of which lasted for seven successive days.
   Christ, says Paul, is our Passover [291] He was sacrificed once, and on
   this condition, that the efficacy of that one oblation should be
   everlasting. What remains now is, that we eat, [292] not once a-year,
   but continually.

   8. Now, in the solemnity of this sacred feast we must abstain from
   leaven, as God commanded the fathers to abstain. But from what leaven?
   As the outward passover was to them a figure of the true passover, so
   its appendages were figures of the reality which we at this day
   possess. If, therefore, we would wish to feed on Christ's flesh and
   blood, let us bring to this feast sincerity and truth Let these be our
   loaves of unleavened bread Away with all malice and wickedness, for it
   is unlawful to mix up leaven with the passover In fine, he declares
   that we shall be members of Christ only when we shall have renounced
   malice and deceit. In the meantime we must carefully observe this
   passage, as showing that the ancient passover was not merely
   mnemosunon, [293] a memorial of a past benefit, but also a sacrament,
   representing Christ who was to come, from whom we have this privilege,
   that we pass from death to life. Otherwise, it would not hold good,
   that in Christ is the body of the legal shadows. (Colossians 2:17.)
   This passage will also be of service for setting aside the sacrilege of
   the Papal mass. For Paul does not teach that Christ is offered daily,
   but that the sacrifice having been offered up once for all, it remains
   that the spiritual feast be celebrated during our whole life.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [284] "Nostre Pasque, assavoir Christ;" -- "Our passover, namely,
   Christ."

   [285] "Avec pains sans leuain, c'est a dire, de syncerite et de
   verite;" -- "With unleavened bread, that is to say, of sincerity and
   truth."

   [286] "Ha en ce passage un mesme sens comme ce qu'on dit communeement,
   Qu'ilne faut qu'vne brebis rongneuse pour gaster tout le troupeau;" --
   "Has in this passage the same meaning as what is commonly said: --
   There needs but one diseased sheep to infect a whole flock."

   [287] -- grex totus in agris ^
   Unius scabie cadit, et porrigine porci: ^
   Uvaque conspecta livorem ducit ab uva ^
   Juv. II. 79-81.

   [288] "Would any one," asks Hervey, (in his Theroa and Aspasio, volume
   1,) "venture to say -- Paul our passover is sacrificed for us?' Yet
   this, I think, may be, or rather is in effect said, by the account
   which some persons give of Christ's satisfaction. The very thought of
   such a blasphemous absurdity is too painful and offensive for the
   serious Christian to dwell upon. I would therefore direct his attention
   to a more pleasing object. Let him observe the exquisite skill which
   here and everywhere conducts the zeal of our inspired writer. The odes
   of Pindar are celebrated for their fine transitions, which, though bold
   and surprising, are perfectly natural. We have in this place," (1
   Corinthians 5:7) "a very masterly stroke of the same beautiful kind.
   The Apostle, speaking of the incestuous criminal, passes, by a most
   artful digression, to his daring topic -- a crucified Savior. Who would
   have expected it on such an occasion? Yet, when thus admitted, who does
   not see and admire both the propriety of the subject and the delicacy
   of its introduction?" -- Ed.

   [289] Our Author gives a similar definition of the expression the old
   man, when [10]commenting on Romans 6:6. "Totam antem naturam
   significat, quam afterlinus ex utero, quae adeo regni Dei capax non
   est, ut interire eatenus oporteat, quatenus in veram vitam
   instauramur;" -- "It denotes the whole of that nature which we bring
   with us from the womb, and is so far from being fit for the kingdom of
   God, that it must perish, in so far as we are renewed to a true life."
   -- Ed.

   [290] "Assauoir, Pasque;" -- "Namely, passover."

   [291] Charnock makes the following pointed observations on the form of
   expression here employed: -- "Christ the Passover -- i e the paschal
   lamb. The lamb was called the passover. The sign for the thing
   signified by it. 2 Chronicles 35:11. And they killed the passover, i e
   the lamb; for the passover was properly the angel's passing over
   Israel, when he was sent as an executioner of God's wrath upon the
   Egyptians So Matthew 26:17. Where shall we prepare for thee to eat the
   passover? i e the paschal lamb. Our passover, i e our paschal lamb. He
   is called God's lamb, John 1:29 God's in regard of the author, ours in
   regard of the end: God's lamb in regard of designation, ours in regard
   of acceptation Our passover, i e not only of the Jews, but of the
   Gentiles. That was restrained to the Israelitish nation, this extends,
   in the offers of it, to all, and belongs to all that are under the new
   administration of the covenant of grace. For us, (huper hemon,) i e not
   only for our good, but in our stead, to free us from eternal death --
   to purchase for us eternal life." -- Charnock's Works, volume 2. -- Ed

   [292] "I1 ne reste plus sinon que nous en soyons nourris;" -- "Nothing
   remains, but that we be nourished by it."

   [293] Our author most probably alludes to Exodus 12:14, "And this day
   shall be unto you for a memorial," etc. The term used in the Septuagint
   is mnemosunon, answering to the Hebrew term zkrvn. -- Ed
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 5:9-13

   9. I wrote unto you in an epistle not to company with fornicators:

   9. Scripsi vobis in Epistola, Ne commisceamini scortatoribus:

   10. Yet not altogether with the fornicators of this world, or with the
   covetous, or extortioners, or with idolaters; for then must ye needs go
   out of the world.

   10. Neque in universum scortatoribus mundi hujus, vel avaris, vel
   rapacibus, vel idololatris: quandoquidem debuissetis ex hoc mundo
   exire.

   11. But now I have written unto you not to keep company, if any man
   that is called a brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater
   or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner; with such an one no not
   to eat.

   11. Nunc autem scripsi vobis, Ne commisceamini: si is qui frater
   nominatur, vel scortator sit, vel avarus, vel idololatra, vel
   maledicus, vel ebriosus, vel rapax: cum tali ne cibum quidem sumatis.

   12. For what have I to do to judge them also that are without? do not
   ye judge them that are within?

   12. Quid enim mea refert extraneos iudicare? an non eos qui intus sunt
   iudicatis?

   13. But them that are without God judgeth. Therefore put away from
   among yourselves that wicked person.

   13. Extraneos vero Deus iudicat: eiicite scelestum ex vobis ipsis.


   9. I wrote to you in an epistle. The epistle of which he speaks is not
   at this day extant. Nor is there any doubt that many others are lost.
   It is enough, however, that those have been preserved to us which the
   Lord foresaw would suffice. But this passage, in consequence of its
   obscurity, has been twisted to a variety of interpretations, which I do
   not think it necessary for me to take up time in setting aside, but
   will simply bring forward what appears to me to be its true meaning. He
   reminds the Corinthians of what he had already enjoined upon them --
   that they should refrain from intercourse with the wicked. For the word
   rendered to keep company with, means to be on terms of familiarity with
   any one, and to be in habits of close intimacy with him. [294] Now, his
   reminding them of this tends to expose their remissness, inasmuch as
   they had been admonished, and yet had remained inactive.

   He adds an exception, that they may the better understand that this
   refers particularly to those that belong to the Church, as they did not
   require to be admonished [295] to avoid the society of the world. In
   short, then, he prohibits the Corinthians from holding intercourse with
   those who, while professing to be believers, do, nevertheless, live
   wickedly and to the dishonor of God. "Let all that wish to be reckoned
   brethren, either live holily and becomingly, or be excommunicated from
   the society of the pious, and let all the good refrain from intercourse
   and familiarity with them. It were superfluous to speak as to the
   openly wicked, for you ought of your own accord to shun them, without
   any admonition from me." This exception, however, increases the
   criminality of remissness, inasmuch as they cherished in the bosom of
   the Church an openly wicked person; for it is more disgraceful to
   neglect those of your own household than to neglect strangers.

   10. Since you would have required. It is as to this clause especially
   that interpreters are not agreed. For some say, "You must sooner quit
   Greece." Ambrose, on the other hand, says, "You must rather die."
   Erasmus turns it into the optative, as if Paul said, "Would that it
   were allowable for you to leave the world altogether; [296] but as you
   cannot do this, you must at least quit the society of those who falsely
   assume the name of Christians, and in the meantime exhibit in their
   lives the worst example." Chrysostom's exposition has more appearance
   of truth. According to him, the meaning is this: "When I command you to
   shun fornicators, I do not mean all such; otherwise you would require
   to go in quest of another world; for we must live among thorns so long
   as we sojourn on earth. This only do I require, that you do not keep
   company with fornicators, who wish to be regarded as brethren, lest you
   should seem by your sufferance to approve of their wickedness." Thus
   the term world here, must be taken to mean the present life, as in John
   17:15

   I pray not, Father, that thou shouldest take them out of the world, but
   that thou shouldest deliver them from the evil.

   Against this exposition a question might be proposed by way of
   objection: "As Paul said this at a time when Christians were as yet
   mingled with heathens, and dispersed among them, what ought to be done
   now, when all have given themselves to Christ in name? For even in the
   present day we must go out of the world, if we would avoid the society
   of the wicked; and there are none that are strangers, when all take
   upon themselves Christ's name, and are consecrated to him by baptism."
   Should any one feel inclined to follow Chrysostom, he will find no
   difficulty in replying, to this effect: that Paul here took for granted
   what was true -- that, where there is the power of excommunication,
   there is an easy remedy for effecting a separation between the good and
   the bad, if Churches do their duty. As to strangers, the Christians at
   Corinth had no jurisdiction, and they could not restrain their
   dissolute manner of life. Hence they must of necessity have quitted the
   world, if they wished to avoid the society of the wicked, whose vices
   they could not cure.

   For my own part, as I do not willingly adopt interpretations which
   cannot be made to suit the words, otherwise than by twisting the words
   so as to suit them, I prefer one that is different from all these,
   taking the word rendered to go out as meaning to be separated, and the
   term world as meaning the pollutions of the world "What need have you
   of an injunction as to the children of this world, (Luke 16:8,) for
   having once for all renounced the world, it becomes you to stand aloof
   from their society; for the whole world lieth in the wicked one." [297]
   (1 John 5:19.) If any one is not satisfied with this interpretation,
   here is still another that is probable: "I do not write to you in
   general terms, that you should shun the society of the fornicators of
   this world, though that you ought to do, without any admonition from
   me." I prefer, however, the former; and I am not the first contriver of
   it, but, while it has been brought forward previously by others, I have
   adapted it more fully, if I mistake not, to Paul's thread of discourse.
   There is, then, [298] a sort of intentional omission, when he says that
   he makes no mention of those that are without, inasmuch as the
   Corinthians ought to be already separated from them, that they may know
   that even at home [299] they required to maintain this discipline of
   avoiding the wicked.

   11. If he who is called a brother In the Greek there is a participle
   [300] without a verb. [301] Those that view this as referring to what
   follows, bring out here a forced meaning, and at variance with Paul's
   intention. I confess, indeed, that that is a just sentiment, [302] and
   worthy of being particularly noticed -- that no one can be punished by
   the decision of the Church, but one whose sin has become matter of
   notoriety; but these words of Paul cannot be made to bear that meaning.
   What he means, then, is this: "If any one is reckoned a brother among
   you, and at the same time leads a wicked life, and such as is
   unbecoming a Christian, keep aloof from his society." In short, being
   called a brother, means here a false profession, which has no
   corresponding reality. Farther, he does not make a complete enumeration
   of crimes, but merely mentions five or six by way of example, and then
   afterwards, under the expression such an one, he sums up the whole; and
   he does not mention any but what fall under the knowledge of men. For
   inward impiety, and anything that is secret, does not fall within the
   judgment of the Church.

   It is uncertain, however, what he means by an idolater For how can he
   be devoted to idolatry who has made a profession of Christ? Some are of
   opinion that there were among the Corinthians at that time some who
   received Christ but in half, and in the mean time were involved,
   nevertheless, in corrupt superstition, as the Israelites of old, and
   afterwards the Samaritans maintained a kind of worship of God, but at
   the same time polluted it with wicked superstitions. For my part, I
   rather understand it of those who, while they held idols in contempt,
   gave, nevertheless, a pretended homage to the idols, with the view of
   gratifying the wicked. Paul declares that such persons ought not to be
   tolerated in the society of Christians; and not without good reason,
   inasmuch as they made so little account of trampling God's glory under
   foot. We must, however, observe the circumstances of the case -- that,
   while they had a Church there, in which they might worship God in
   purity, and have the lawful use of the sacraments, they came into the
   Church in such a way as not to renounce the profane fellowship of the
   wicked. I make this observation, in order that no one may think that we
   ought to employ equally severe measures against those who, while at
   this day dispersed under the tyranny of the Pope, pollute themselves
   with many corrupt rites. These indeed, I maintain, sin generally in
   this respect, and they ought, I acknowledge, to be sharply dealt with,
   and diligently urged, [303] that they may learn at length to consecrate
   themselves wholly to Christ; but I dare not go so far as to reckon them
   worthy of excommunication, for their case is different. [304]

   With such an one not even to take food. In the first place, we must
   ascertain whether he addresses here the whole Church, or merely
   individuals. I answer, that this is said, indeed, to individuals, but,
   at the same time, it is connected with their discipline in common; for
   the power of excommunicating is not allowed to any individual member,
   but to the entire body. When, therefore, the Church has excommunicated
   any one, no believer ought to receive him into terms of intimacy with
   him; otherwise the authority of the Church would be brought into
   contempt, if each individual were at liberty to admit to his table
   those who have been excluded from the table of the Lord. By partaking
   of food here, is meant either living together, or familiar association
   in meals. For if, on going into an inn, I see one who has been
   excommunicated sitting at table, there is nothing to hinder me from
   dining with him; for I have not authority to exclude him. What Paul
   means is, that, in so far as it is in our power, we are to shun the
   society of those whom the Church has cut off from her communion.

   The Roman antichrist, not content with this severity, has burst forth
   into interdicts, prohibiting any one from helping one that has been
   excommunicated to food, or fuel, or drink, or any other of the supports
   of life. [305] Now, that is not strictness of discipline, but
   tyrannical and barbarous cruelty, that is altogether at variance with
   Paul's intention. For he means not that he should be counted as an
   enemy, but as a brother, (2 Thessalonians 3:15;) for in putting this
   public mark of disgrace upon him, the intention is, that he may be
   filled with shame, and brought to repentance. And with this dreadful
   cruelty, if God is pleased to permit, do they rage even against the
   innocent. [306] Now, granting that there are sometimes those who are
   not undeserving of this punishment, I affirm, on the other hand, that
   this kind of interdict [307] is altogether unsuitable to an
   ecclesiastical court.

   12. For what have I to do to judge them that are without? There is
   nothing to hinder us from judging these also -- nay more, even devils
   themselves are not exempt from the judgment of the word which is
   committed to us. But Paul is speaking here of the jurisdiction that
   belongs peculiarly to the Church. "The Lord has furnished us with this
   power, that we may exercise it upon those who belong to his household.
   For this chastisement is a part of discipline which is confined to the
   Church, and does not extend to strangers. We do not therefore pronounce
   upon them their condemnation, because the Lord has not subjected them
   to our cognizance and jurisdiction, in so far as that chastisement and
   censure are concerned. We are, therefore, constrained to leave them to
   the judgment of God." It is in this sense that Paul says, that God will
   judge them, because he allows them to wander about [308] unbridled like
   wild beasts, because there is no one that can restrain their
   wantonness.

   13. Put away that wicked person. This is commonly explained as
   referring to the person who was guilty of an illicit connection with
   his mother-in-law. For as to those who understand the expression to
   mean -- "Put away evil or wickedness," they are refuted by the Greek
   words made use of by Paul, the article (ton) being in the masculine
   gender, But what if you should view it as referring to the devil, who,
   undoubtedly in the person of a wicked and unprincipled man, [309] is
   encouraged to establish his throne among us? For ho poneros (the wicked
   one) taken simply and without any addition, denotes the prince of all
   crimes, [310] rather than some wicked man. If this meaning is approved
   of, Paul shows how important it is [311] not to tolerate wicked
   persons, as by this means Satan is expelled from his kingdom which he
   keeps up among us, when indulgence is given to the wicked. [312] If any
   one, however, prefers to understand it as referring to a man, I do not
   oppose it. Chrysostom compares the rigor of the law with the mildness
   of the gospel, inasmuch as Paul was satisfied with excommunication in
   case of an offense for which the law required the punishment of death,
   but for this there is no just ground. For Paul is not here addressing
   judges that are armed with the sword, but an unarmed multitude [313]
   that was allowed merely to make use of brotherly correction.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [294] The original word, sunanamignusthai, literally means to be mixed
   up together with It is the rendering of the Septuagint for the Hebrew
   word ytvvll, in Hosea 7:8 Ephraim hath mixed himself among the people.
   -- Ed

   [295] "Ce seroit vne chose superflue de les admonester," etc.; -- "It
   were a superfluous thing to admonish them," etc.

   [296] "The rendering of Erasmus is as follows: "Alioqui utinam
   videlicet e mundo exissetis;" -- "Otherwise I would, truly, that you
   had departed out of the world."

   [297] "Car tout le monde est mis a mal;" -- "For the whole world is
   addicted to evil."

   [298] "En ceste sentence;" -- "In this sentence."

   [299] "C'est a dire, entr'eux;" -- "That is to say, among themselves."

   [300] "Au texte Grec il y a de mot a mot, Si aucun frere nomme," etc.;
   -- "In the Greek text it literally, If any one, called a brother," etc.

   [301] It is so according to the common reading, which is as follows: --
   ea'n tis, adelphos onomazomenos, he pornos, he pleonektes, k. t. l.."
   If any one, called a brother -- either a fornicator, or covetous,"
   etc.; but, as stated by Bloomfield, "seven MSS., and many versions, and
   Fathers, the Ed. Princ., and those of Beza, Schmid., and Beng., have e,
   (before pornos,) which is approved by Wets., and Matth., and edited by
   Griesb., Knapp., Vat., and Tittm.;" and, in Bloomfield's opinion,
   "rightly." -- Ed

   [302] "Qu'ils en tirent;" -- "Which they draw from it."

   [303] "Il les faut redarguer auec seuerite, et les soliciter
   continuellement par admonitions;" -- "They ought to be reproved with
   severity, and plied perseveringly with admonitions."

   [304] "Car leur condition n'est pas telle comme estoit celle des
   Corinthiens;" -- "For their condition is not like that of the
   Corinthians."

   [305] "Est venu furieusement jusques aux defenses et menaces, Que nul
   ne fust si hardi de donner a boire ou a manger, ou de feu a celuy qui
   seroit excommunier, ou de luy aider aucunement des choses necessaires a
   la vie presente;" -- "Has in his fury gone so far as to issue forth
   prohibitions and threatenings -- Let no one be so daring as to give
   meat, or drink, or fuel, to the man who has been excommunicated, or to
   help him in any way with the things necessary for the present life.'"

   [306] "Et ces bourreaux encore exercent ceste cruaute extreme, mesme
   contre les innocens;" -- "And these hangmen do, besides, exercise this
   extreme cruelty even against the innocent."

   [307] "Telle facon d'excommunier;" -- "Such a method of
   excommunication."

   [308] "Et courir a trauers champs;" -- "And run across the fields."

   [309] "Quand on supporte un homme meschant et mal-vivant;" -- "When a
   wicked and unprincipled man is allowed to continue." -- Ed.

   [310] It is well observed by Witsius in his Dissertations on the Lord's
   Prayer, (Biblical Cabinet, No. 24,) that the appellation of the evil
   One is properly applied to Satan, "because he does nothing but what is
   evil -- because all the evil that exists in the universe originated
   with him -- because in doing evil, and in persuading others to do evil,
   he finds his only delight, the wicked and malignant solace of his
   desperate misery." -- Ed.

   [311] "Combien il est utile et necessaire;" -- "How useful it is and
   necessary."

   [312] "Quand il y a vne license de malfaire, et les meschans sont
   soufferts;" -- "When there is a license to do evil, and the wicked are
   tolerated."

   [313] "Desnuee de puissance externe;" -- "Destitute of external power."
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 6
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 6:1-8

   1. Dare any of you, having a matter against another, go to law before
   the unjust, and not before the saints?

   1. Audet aliquis vestrum, negotium habens cum altero, litigare sub
   iniustis, et non sub sanctis?

   2. Do ye not know that the saints shall judge the world? and if the
   world shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the smallest
   matters?

   2. An nescitis, quod sancti mundum iudicabunt? quodsi in vobis
   iudicatur mundus, indigni estis minimis iudiciis?

   3. Know ye not that we shall judge angels? how much more things pertain
   to this life?

   3. An nescitis, quod angelos iudicabimus, nedum ad victum pertinentia?

   4. If then ye have judgments of things pertaining to this life, set
   them to judge who are least esteemed in the church.

   4. Iudicia ergo de rebus ad victum pertinentibus si habueritis, qui
   contemptibiles sunt in Ecclesia, [314] eos constituite.

   5. I speak to your shame. Is it so, that there is not a wise man among
   you? no, not one that shall be able to judge between his brethren?

   5. Ad erubescentiam vestram dico: adeo non est inter vos sapiens, ne
   unus quidem, qui possit iudicare inter fratres?

   6. But brother goeth to law with brother, and that before the
   unbelievers.

   6. Sed frater cum fratre litigat, idque sub infidelibus.

   7. Now therefore there is utterly a fault among you, because ye go to
   law one with another. Why do ye not rather take wrong? why do ye not
   rather suffer yourselves to be defrauded?

   7. Jam quidera omnino delictum in vobis est, quod iudicia habetis inter
   vos: cur non potius iniuriam sustinetis? [315]

   8. Nay, ye do wrong, and defraud, and that your brethren.

   8. Sed vos infertis iniuriam, et fraudatis, et quidem fratres.


   Here, he begins to reprove another fault among the Corinthians -- an
   excessive fondness for litigation, which took its rise from avarice.
   Now, this reproof consists of two parts. The first is, that by bringing
   their disputes before the tribunals of the wicked, they by this means
   made the gospel contemptible, and exposed it to derision. The second
   is, that while Christians ought to endure injuries with patience, they
   inflicted injury on others, rather than allow themselves to be
   subjected to any inconvenience. Thus, the first part is particular: the
   other is general.

   1. Dare any of you This is the first statement -- that, if any one has
   a controversy with a brother, it ought to be decided before godly
   judges, and that it ought not to be before those that are ungodly. If
   the reason is asked, I have already said, that it is because disgrace
   is brought upon the gospel, and the name of Christ is held up as it
   were to the scoffings of the ungodly. For the ungodly, at the
   instigation of Satan, are always eagerly on the watch [316] for
   opportunities of finding occasion of calumny against the doctrine of
   godliness. Now believers, when they make them parties in their
   disputes, seem as though they did on set purpose furnish them with a
   handle for reviling. A second reason may be added -- that we treat our
   brethren disdainfully, when we of our own accord subject them to the
   decisions of unbelievers.

   But here it may be objected: "As it belongs to the office of the
   magistrate, and as it is peculiarly his province to administer justice
   to all, and to decide upon matters in dispute, why should not even
   unbelievers, who are in the office of magistrate, have this authority,
   and, if they have it, why are we prevented from maintaining our rights
   before their tribunals?" I answer, that Paul does not here condemn
   those who from necessity have a cause before unbelieving judges, [317]
   as when a person is summoned to a court; but those who, of their own
   accord, bring their brethren into this situation, and harass them, as
   it were, through means of unbelievers, while it is in their power to
   employ another remedy. It is wrong, therefore, to institute of one's
   own accord a law-suit against brethren before unbelieving judges. If,
   on the other hand, you are summoned to a court, there is no harm in
   appearing there and maintaining your cause.

   2. Know ye not that the saints. Here we have an argument from the less
   to the greater; for Paul, being desirous to show that injury is done to
   the Church of God when judgments on matters of dispute connected with
   earthly things are carried before unbelievers, as if there were no one
   in the society of the godly that was qualified to judge, reasons in
   this strain: "Since God has reckoned the saints worthy of such honor,
   as to have appointed them to be judges of the whole world, it is
   unreasonable that they should be shut out from judging as to small
   matters, as persons not qualified for it." Hence it follows, that the
   Corinthians inflict injury upon themselves, in resigning into the hands
   of unbelievers the honor [318] that has been conferred upon them by
   God.

   What is said here as to judging the world ought to be viewed as
   referring to that declaration of Christ:

   When the Son of Man shall come, ye shall sit, etc.
   (Matthew 19:28.)

   For all power of judgment has been committed to the Son,
   (John 5:22,)

   in such a manner that he will receive his saints into a participation
   with him in this honor, as assessors. Apart from this, they will judge
   the world, as indeed they begin already to do, because their piety,
   faith, fear of the Lord, good conscience, and integrity of life, will
   make unbelievers altogether inexcusable, as it is said of Noah, that by
   his faith he condemned all the men of his age. (Hebrews 11:7.) But the
   former signification accords better with the Apostle's design, for
   unless you take the judging here spoken of in its proper acceptation,
   the reasoning will not hold.

   But even in this sense [319] it may seem not to have much weight, for
   it is as if one should say' "The saints are endowed with heavenly
   wisdom, which immeasurably transcends all human doctrines: therefore
   they can judge better as to the stars than astrologers." Now this no
   one will allow, and the ground of objection is obvious -- because piety
   and spiritual doctrine do not confer a knowledge of human arts. My
   answer here is this, that between expertness in judging and other arts
   there is this difference, that while the latter are acquired by
   acuteness of intellect and by study, and are learned from masters,
   [320] the former depends rather on equity and conscientiousness.

   But [321] "lawyers will judge better and more confidently than an
   illiterate Christian: otherwise the knowledge of law is of no
   advantage." I answer, that their advice is not here excluded, for if
   the determination of any obscure question is to be sought from a
   knowledge of the laws, the Apostle does not hinder Christians from
   applying to lawyers. [322] What he finds fault with in the Corinthians
   is simply this, that they carry their disputes before unbelieving
   judges, as if they had none in the Church that were qualified to pass
   judgment, and farther, he shows how much superior is the judgment that
   God has assigned to his believing people.

   The words rendered in you mean here, in my opinion, among you. For
   whenever believers meet in one place, under the auspices of Christ,
   [323] there is already in their assembly a sort of image of the future
   judgment, which will be perfectly brought to light on the last day.
   Accordingly Paul says, that the world is judged in the Church, because
   there Christ's tribunal is erected, from which he exercises his
   authority. [324]

   3. Know ye not that we shall judge angels? This passage is taken in
   different ways. Chrysostom states that some understood it as referring
   to priests, [325] but this is exceedingly far-fetched. Others
   understand it of the angels in heaven, in this sense -- that the angels
   are subject to the judgment of God's word, and may be judged by us, if
   need be, by means of that word, as it is said in the Epistle to the
   Galatians --

   If an angel from heaven bring any other gospel, let him be accursed.
   (Galatians 1:8.)

   Nor does this exposition appear at first view unsuitable to the thread
   of Paul's discourse; for if all whom God has enlightened by his word
   are endowed with such authority, that through means of that word they
   judge not only men but angels too, how much more will they be prepared
   to judge of small and trivial matters? As, however, Paul speaks here in
   the future tense, as referring to the last day, and as his words convey
   the idea of an actual judgment, (as the common expression is,) it were
   preferable, in my opinion, to understand him as speaking of apostate
   [326] angels. For the argument will be not less conclusive in this way:
   "Devils, who sprang from so illustrious an origin, and even now, when
   they have fallen from their high estate, are immortal creatures, and
   superior to this corruptible world, shall be judged by us. What then?
   Shall those things that are subservient to the belly be exempted from
   our judgment?

   4. If you have judgments then as to things pertaining to this life We
   must always keep in view what causes he is treating of; for public
   trials are beyond our province, and ought not to be transferred to our
   disposal; but as to private matters it is allowable to determine
   without the cognizance of the magistrate. As, then, we do not detract
   in any degree from the authority of the magistrate by having recourse
   to arbitration, it is not without good reason that the Apostle enjoins
   it upon Christians to refrain from resorting to profane, that is,
   unbelieving judges. And lest they should allege that they were deprived
   of a better remedy, he directs them to choose out of the Church
   arbiters, who may settle causes agreeably and equitably. Farther, lest
   they should allege that they have not a sufficient number of qualified
   persons, he says that the meanest is competent to discharge this
   office. There is, therefore, no detracting here from the dignity of the
   office of magistrates, when he gives orders that their office be
   committed to contemptible persons, for this (as I have already said) is
   stated by anticipation, as though he had said: "Even the lowest and
   meanest among you will discharge this office better than those
   unbelieving judges to whom you have recourse. So far are you from
   necessity in this way."

   Chrysostom comes near this interpretation, though he appends to it
   something additional; for he is of opinion, that the Apostle meant to
   say, that, even though the Corinthians should find no one among
   themselves who had sufficient wisdom for judging, they must
   nevertheless make choice of some, of whatever stamp they were. Ambrose
   touches neither heaven nor earth. [327] I think I have faithfully
   brought out the Apostle's intention -- that the lowest among believers
   was preferred by him to unbelievers, as to capacity of judging. There
   are some that strike out a quite different meaning, for they understand
   the word kathizete to be in the present tense -- You set them to judge,
   and by those that are least esteemed in the Church they understand
   profane persons. [328] This, however, is more ingenious than solid, for
   that were a poor designation of unbelievers. [329] Besides, the form of
   expression, if you have, would not suit so well with a reproof, for the
   expression would have required rather to be while you have, for that
   condition takes away from the force of it. Hence I am the more inclined
   to think, that a remedy for the evil is here prescribed.

   That this statement, however, was taken up wrong by the ancients,
   appears from a certain passage in Augustine. For in his book -- "On the
   Work of Monks," where he makes mention of his employments, he declares
   that among his numerous engagements, the most disagreeable of all was,
   that he was under the necessity of devoting a part of the day to
   secular affairs, but that he at the same time endured it patiently,
   because the Apostle [330] had imposed upon him this necessity. From
   this passage, and from a certain epistle, it appears that the bishops
   were accustomed to sit at certain hours to settle disputes, as if the
   Apostle had been referring to them here. As, however, matters always
   become worse, there sprang from this error, in process of time, that
   jurisdiction which the officials of the bishops assume to themselves in
   money matters. In that ancient custom there are two things that are
   deserving of reproof -- that the bishops were involved in matters that
   were foreign to their office; and that they wronged God in making his
   authority and command a pretext for turning aside from their proper
   calling. The evil, however, was in some degree excusable, but as for
   the profane custom, which has come to prevail in the Papacy, it were
   the height of baseness to excuse or defend it.

   5. I speak to your shame The meaning is -- "If other considerations do
   not influence you, let it at least be considered by you, how
   disgraceful it is to you that there is not so much as one among you who
   is qualified to settle an affair amicably among brethren -- an honor
   which you assign to unbelievers Now this passage is not inconsistent
   with the declaration which we met with above, when he stated that he
   did not make mention of their faults with the view of shaming them, (1
   Corinthians 4:14,) for instead of this, by putting them to shame in
   this manner, he calls them back from disgrace, [331] and shows that he
   is desirous to promote their honor. He does not wish them, then, to
   form so unfavorable an opinion of their society, as to take away from
   all their brethren an honor which they allow to unbelievers

   7. Now indeed there is utterly a fault. Here we have the second part of
   the reproof, which contains a general doctrine; for he now reproves
   them, not on the ground of their exposing the gospel to derision and
   disgrace, but on the ground of their going to law with each other.
   This, he says, is a fault We must, however, observe the propriety of
   the term which he employs. For hettema in Greek signifies weakness of
   mind, as when one is easily broken down [332] by injuries, and cannot
   bear anything it comes afterward to be applied to vices of any kind, as
   they all arise from weakness and deficiency in fortitude. [333] What
   Paul, then, condemns in the Corinthians is this -- that they harassed
   one another with law-suits. He states the reason of it -- that they
   were not prepared to bear injuries patiently. And, assuredly, as the
   Lord commands us (Matthew 5:44; Romans 12:21) not to be overcome by
   evils, but on the contrary to overcome injuries by acts of kindness, it
   is certain, that those who cannot control themselves so as to suffer
   injuries patiently, commit sin by their impatience. If contention in
   law-suits among believers is a token of that impatience, it follows
   that it is faulty

   In this way, however, he seems to discard entirely judgments as to the
   affairs of individuals. "Those are altogether in the wrong who go to
   law. Hence it will not be allowable in any one to maintain his rights
   by having recourse to a magistrate." There are some that answer this
   objection in this way -- that the Apostle declares that where there are
   law-suits there is utterly a fault, because, of necessity, the one or
   the other has a bad cause. They do not, however, escape by this
   sophistry, because he says that they are in fault, not merely when they
   inflict injury, but also when they do not patiently endure it. For my
   own part, my answer is simply this -- having a little before given
   permission to have recourse to arbiters, he has in this shown, with
   sufficient clearness, that, Christians are not prohibited from
   prosecuting their rights moderately, and without any breach of love.
   Hence we may very readily infer, that his being so severe was owing to
   his taking particularly into view the circumstances of the case. And,
   undoubtedly, wherever there is frequent recourse to law-suits, or where
   the parties contend with each other pertinaciously with rigor of law,
   [334] it is in that case abundantly plain, that their minds are
   immoderately inflamed with wrong dispositions, and are not prepared for
   equity and endurance of wrongs, according to the commandment of Christ.
   To speak more plainly, the reason why Paul condemns law-suits is, that
   we ought to suffer injuries with patience. Let us now see whether any
   one can carry on a law-suit without impatience; for if it is so, to go
   to law will not be wrong in all cases, but only epi to polu -- for the
   most part. I confess, however, that as men's manners are corrupt,
   impatience, or lack of patience (as they speak) is an almost
   inseparable attendant on lawsuits. This, however, does not hinder your
   distinguishing between the thing itself and the improper accompaniment.
   Let us therefore bear in mind, that Paul does not condemn law-suits on
   the ground of its being a wrong thing in itself to maintain a good
   cause by having recourse to a magistrate, but because it is almost
   invariably accompanied with corrupt dispositions; as, for example,
   violence, desire of revenge, enmities, obstinacy, and the like.

   It is surprising that this question has not been more carefully handled
   by ecclesiastical writers. Augustine has bestowed more pains upon it
   than the others, and has come nearer the mark; [335] but even he is
   somewhat obscure, though there is truth in what he states. Those who
   aim at greater clearness in their statements tell us that we must
   distinguish between public and private revenge; for while the
   magistrate's vengeance is appointed by God, those who have recourse to
   it do not rashly take vengeance at their own hand, but have recourse to
   God as an Avenger. [336] This, it is true, is said judiciously and
   appropriately; but we must go a step farther; for if it be not
   allowable even to desire vengeance from God, then, on the same
   principle, it were not allowable to have recourse to the magistrate for
   vengeance.

   I acknowledge, then, that a Christian man is altogether prohibited from
   revenge, so that he must not exercise it, either by himself, or by
   means of the magistrate, nor even desire it. If, therefore, a Christian
   man wishes to prosecute his rights at law, so as not to offend God, he
   must, above all things, take heed that he does not bring into court any
   desire of revenge, any corrupt affection of the mind, or anger, or, in
   fine, any other poison. In this matter love will be the best regulator.
   [337]

   If it is objected, that it very rarely happens that any one carries on
   a law-suit entirely free and exempt from every corrupt affection, I
   acknowledge that it is so, and I say farther, that it is rare to find a
   single instance of an upright litigant; but it is useful for many
   reasons to show that the thing is not evil in itself, but is rendered
   corrupt by abuse: First, that it may not seem as if God had to no
   purpose appointed courts of justice; Secondly, that the pious may know
   how far their liberties extend, that they may not take anything in hand
   against the dictates of conscience. For it is owing to this that many
   rush on to open contempt of God, when they have once begun to
   transgress those limits; [338] Thirdly, that they may be admonished,
   that they must always keep within bounds, so as not to pollute by their
   own misconduct the remedy which the Lord has permitted them to employ;
   Lastly, that the audacity of the wicked may be repressed by a pure and
   uncorrupted zeal, which could not be effected, if we were not allowed
   to subject them to legal punishments.

   8. But ye do injury. Hence we see for what reason he has inveighed
   against them with so much bitterness -- because there prevailed among
   them such a base desire of gain, that they did not even refrain from
   injuring one another. He premised a little before, with the view of
   exposing the magnitude of the evil, that those are not Christians who
   know not to endure injuries. There is, then, an amplification here,
   founded on a comparison: for if it is wrong not to bear injuries
   patiently, how much worse is it to inflict them?

   And that your brethren Here is another aggravation of the evil; for if
   those are doubly culpable who defraud strangers, it is monstrous for
   brother to be cheated or despoiled by brother Now all of us are
   brethren that call upon one Father in heaven (Matthew 23:9.) At the
   same time, if any one acts an unprincipled part towards strangers, Paul
   does not palliate the crime; but he teaches that the Corinthians were
   utterly blinded in making sacred brotherhood a matter of no moment.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [314] "De moindre estime en l'Eglise, ou, de nulle estime, assauoir au
   pris des autres;" -- "Of least esteem in the Church, or of no esteem;
   that is, in comparison with others."

   [315] "Pourquoy plustost n'endurez-vous l'injure? Pourqaoy plustost ne
   receuez-vous dommage?" -- "Why, do you not rather suffer injury? Why do
   you not rather submit to loss?

   [316] "Espient incessamment et d'vne affection ardente;" -- "Watch
   incessantly and with eager desire."

   [317] "Qui sont necessairement contraints de maintenir et plaider leurs
   causes sous iuges infideles;" -- "Who are from necessity shut up to
   maintain and defend their law-suits before unbelieving judges."

   [318] "L'honneur et la prerogatiue;" -- "The honor and the
   prerogative."

   [319] "Mais, dira quelqu'vn, encore a le prendre ainsi;" -- "But, some
   one will say, even taking it in this way."

   [320] "Sous precepteurs et maistres;" -- "Under preceptors and
   masters."

   [321] "Mais, dira quelqu'vn:" -- "But, some one will say."

   [322] "Ne defend point aux Chrestiens d'aller demander conseil aux
   Legistes;" -- "Does not hinder Christians from going to ask the advice
   of lawyers."

   [323] "Au nom de Christ;" -- "In the name of Christ."

   [324] "Auquel estant comme assis, il exerce sa iurisdiction;" -- "On
   which being as it were seated, he exercises his authority."

   [325] "Des prestres et ministres;" -- "Of priests and ministers."

   [326] "Apostats et rebelles;" -- "Apostate and rebellious."

   [327] "Sainct Ambrose ne touche ne ciel ne terre (cornroe on dit) en
   l'exposition de ces mots;" -- "St. Ambrose touches neither heaven nor
   earth (as the expression is) in the exposition of these words." -- Our
   Author's meaning seems to be that Ambrose hangs in suspense, or gives
   no decided opinion. -- Ed.

   [328] "Les gens profanes et infideles;" -- "Profane and unbelieving
   persons."

   [329] "Car ce seroit vne facon de parler bien maigre et de peu de
   grace, d'appeler ainsi les infideles;" -- "For it were a very meager
   and awkward way of speaking, to describe unbelievers in this manner."

   [330] "Sainct Paul;" -- "Saint Paul."

   [331] "Il les garde de tomber en reproche;" -- "He guards them against
   falling into reproach."

   [332] "Aiseement abbatu et irrite;" -- "Easily hurt and irritated."

   [333] The Greek term hettema is supposed by some to be derived
   originally from the Hebrew verb chtt to be broken, (which is rendered
   by hettaomai, in various instances in the Septuagint.) Our author had
   probably an eye to this when stating the original meaning of the term
   to be "weakness of mind, as when one is easily broken down by
   injuries." The term properly denotes defect It is instructive to
   observe, that a disposition to "go to law with brethren," rather than
   "suffer wrong," is represented by the Apostle as indicative of a
   defect, that is, in Christian meekness or brotherly love; while the
   opposite disposition, recommended by the Apostle, would, according to
   the standard of the world's morality, discover defect, in respect of
   want of spirit. -- Ed

   [334] "Et qu'ils veulent veoir le bout du proces; (comme on dit;)" --
   "And are desirous to see the issue of the case, (as the expression
   is.)"

   [335] Our Author, when treating at some length of the same subject in
   the Institutes, (volume 3, p. 543,) makes a particular reference to
   Augustine. (Ep. 5. ad Marcell.) -- Ed.

   [336] "Se retirent a Dieu comme a celuy a qui appartient la vengeance;"
   -- "They have recourse to God, as to him to whom vengeance belongeth."
   (Psalm 94:1.)

   [337] "Pour estre bien gouuerne en ceci, il faut estre gaeni d'vne
   vraye charite;" -- "To be properly regulated in this, we must be
   adorned with true love."

   [338] "Plusieurs tombent en ceste malediction, de mepriser Dieu
   ouuertement;" -- "Many fall into that curse of openly contemning God."
   (Psalm 10:13.)
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 6:9-11

   9. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of
   God? Be not deceived: neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor
   adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind,

   9. An nescitis, quod iniusti regenum Dei hereditate non obtinebunt? Ne
   erretis, neque scortatores, neque idololatrae, neque moechi, neque
   molles, neque paederastse.

   10. Nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor
   extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God.

   10. Neque fures, neque avari, neque ebriosi, neque maledici, neque
   rapaces regnum Dei hereditate obtinebunt.

   11. And such were some of you: but ye are washed, but ye are
   sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by
   the Spirit of our God.

   11. Et haec fuistis, [339] sed abluti estis, sed sanctificati estis,
   sed iustificati estis in nomine Domini Jesu, et in Spiritu Dei nostri.


   9. Know ye not, etc. By unrighteousness here you may understand what is
   opposed to strict integrity. The unrighteous, then, that is, those who
   inflict injury on their brethren, who defraud or circumvent others,
   who, in short, are intent upon their own advantage at the expense of
   injuring others, will not inherit the kingdom of God That by the
   unrighteous here, as for example adulterers, and thieves and covetous,
   and revilers, he means those who do not repent of their sins, but
   obstinately persist in them, is too manifest to require that it should
   be stated. The Apostle himself, too, afterwards expresses this in the
   words employed by him, when he says that the Corinthians formerly were
   such The wicked, then, do inherit the kingdom of God, but it is only in
   the event of their having been first converted to the Lord in true
   repentance, and having in this way ceased to be wicked. For although
   conversion is not the ground of pardon, yet we know that none are
   reconciled to God but those who repent. The interrogation, however, is
   emphatic, for it intimates that he states nothing but what they
   themselves know, and is matter of common remark among all pious
   persons.

   Be not deceived He takes occasion from one vice to speak of many. I am
   of opinion, however, that he has pointed out those vices chiefly which
   prevailed among the Corinthians. He makes use of three terms for
   reproving those lascivious passions which, as all historical accounts
   testify, reigned, nay raged, to an extraordinary height in that city.
   For it was a city that abounded in wealth, (as has been stated
   elsewhere.) It was a celebrated mart, which was frequented by merchants
   from many nations. Wealth has luxury as its attendant -- the mother of
   unchastity and all kinds of lasciviousness. In addition to this, a
   nation which was of itself prone to wantonness, was prompted to it by
   many other corruptions.

   The difference between fornicators and adulterers is sufficiently well
   known. By effeminate persons I understand those who, although they do
   not openly abandon themselves to impurity, discover, nevertheless,
   their unchastity by blandishments of speech, by lightness of gesture
   and apparel, and other allurements. The fourth description of crime is
   the most abominable of all -- that monstrous pollution which was but
   too prevalent in Greece.

   He employs three terms in reproving injustice and injuries. He gives
   the name of thieves to those who take the advantage of their brethren
   by any kind of fraud or secret artifice. By extortioners, he means
   those that violently seize on another's wealth, or like harpies [340]
   drew to themselves from every quarter, and devour. With the view of
   giving his discourse a wider range, he afterwards adds all covetous
   persons too. Under the term drunkards you are to understand him as
   including those who go to excess in eating. He more particularly
   reproves revilers, because, in all probability, that city was full of
   gossip and slanders. In short, he makes mention chiefly of those vices
   to which, he saw, that city was addicted.

   Farther, that his threatening may have more weight, he says, be not
   deceived; by which expression he admonishes them not to flatter
   themselves with a vain hope, as persons are accustomed, by extenuating
   their offenses, to inure themselves to contempt of God. No poison,
   therefore, is more dangerous than those allurements which encourage us
   in our sins. Let us, therefore, shun, not as the songs of the Sirens,
   [341] but as the deadly bites of Satan, the talk of profane persons,
   when turning the judgment of God and reproofs of sins into matter of
   jest. Lastly, we must also notice here the propriety of the word
   kleronomein -- to inherit; which shows that the kingdom of heaven is
   the inheritance of sons, and therefore comes to us through the
   privilege of adoption.

   11. And such were ye. Some add a term of speciality: Such were some of
   you, as in Greek the word tines is added; but I am rather of opinion
   that the Apostle speaks in a general way. I consider that term to be
   redundant, in accordance with the practice of the Greeks, who
   frequently make use of it for the sake of ornament, not by way of
   restriction. We must not, however, understand him as putting all in one
   bundle, so as to attribute all these vices to each of them, but he
   simply means to intimate, that no one is altogether free from these
   vices, until he has been renewed by the Spirit. For we must hold this,
   that man's nature universally contains the seed of all evils, but that
   some vices prevail and discover themselves more in some than in others,
   according as the Lord brings out to view the depravity of the flesh by
   its fruits.

   Thus Paul, in the first chapter of his Epistle to the Romans, piles up
   many different kinds of vices and crimes, which flow from ignorance of
   God, and that ingratitude, of which he had shown all unbelievers to be
   guilty, (Romans 1:21-32) -- not that every unbeliever is infected with
   all these vices, but that all are liable to them, and no one is exempt
   from them all. For he who is not an adulterer, sins in some other way.
   So also in the third chapter he brings forward as applicable to the
   sons of Adam universally those declarations --

   their throat is an open sepulcher: their feet are swift to shed blood:
   their tongue is deceitful or poisonous, (Romans 3:13-15)

   -- not that all are sanguinary and cruel, or that all are treacherous
   or revilers; but that, previously to our being formed anew by God, one
   is inclined to cruelty, another to treachery, another to impurity,
   another to deceit; so that there is no one in whom there does not exist
   some trace of the corruption common to all; and we are all of us, to a
   man, by an internal and secret affection of the mind, liable to all
   diseases, unless in so far as the Lord inwardly restrains them from
   breaking forth openly. [342] The simple meaning, therefore, is this,
   that prior to their being regenerated by grace, some of the Corinthians
   were covetous, others adulterers, others extortioners, others
   effeminate, others revilers, but now, being made free by Christ, they
   were such no longer.

   The design of the Apostle, however, is to humble them, by calling to
   their remembrance their former condition; and, farther, to stir them up
   to acknowledge the grace of God towards them. For the greater the
   misery is acknowledged to be, from which we have escaped through the
   Lord's kindness, so much the more does the magnitude of his grace shine
   forth. Now the commendation of grace is a fountain [343] of
   exhortations, because we ought to take diligent heed, that we may not
   make void the kindness of God, which ought to be so highly esteemed. It
   is as though he had said: "It is enough that God has drawn you out of
   that mire in which you were formerly sunk;" as Peter also says,

   "The time past is sufficient to have fulfilled the lusts
   of the Gentiles." (1 Peter 4:3.)

   But ye are washed He makes use of three terms to express one and the
   same thing, that he may the more effectually deter them from rolling
   back into the condition from which they had escaped. Hence, though
   these three terms have the same general meaning, there is,
   nevertheless, great force in their very variety. For there is an
   implied contrast between washing and defilement -- sanctification and
   pollution -- justification and guilt. His meaning is, that having been
   once justified, they must not draw down upon themselves a new
   condemnation -- that, having been sanctified, they must not pollute
   themselves anew -- that, having been washed, they must not disgrace
   themselves with new defilements, but, on the contrary, aim at purity,
   persevere in true holiness, and abominate their former pollutions. And
   hence we infer what is the purpose for which God reconciles us to
   himself by the free pardon of our sins. While I have said that one
   thing is expressed by three terms, I do not mean that there is no
   difference whatever in their import, for, properly speaking, God
   justifies us when he frees us from condemnation, by not imputing to us
   our sins; he cleanses us, when he blots out the remembrance of our
   sins. Thus these two terms differ only in this respect, that the one is
   simple, while the other is figurative; for the term washing is
   metaphorical, Christ's blood being likened to water. On the other hand,
   he sanctifies by renewing our depraved nature by his Spirit. Thus
   sanctification is connected with regeneration. In this passage,
   however, the Apostle had simply in view to extol, with many
   commendations, the grace of God, which has delivered us from the
   bondage of sin, that we may learn from this how much it becomes us to
   hold in abhorrence everything that stirs up against us God's anger and
   vengeance.

   In the name of the Lord Jesus, etc With propriety and elegance he
   distinguishes between different offices. For the blood of Christ is the
   procuring cause of our cleansing: righteousness and sanctification come
   to us through his death and resurrection. But, as the cleansing
   effected by Christ, and the attainment of righteousness, are of no
   avail except to those who have been made partakers of those blessings
   by the influence of the Holy Spirit, it is with propriety that he makes
   mention of the Spirit in connection with Christ. Christ, then, is the
   source of all blessings to us from him we obtain all things; but Christ
   himself, with all his blessings, is communicated to us by the Spirit.
   For it is by faith that we receive Christ, and have his graces applied
   to us. The Author of faith is the Spirit.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [339] "Et telles choses auez-vous este," ou "este aucuns;" -- "And such
   things were you," or "were some of you."

   [340] "Comme bestes rauissantes;" -- "Like ravenous beasts." The
   harpies, it is well known, were fabulous monsters, proverbial for
   rapacity. It deserves to be noticed that their name harpuiai, and the
   term made use of by Paul to denote extortioners, (harpages) are both of
   them derived from harpazo, to seize upon, or take by violence. -- Ed

   [341] The Sirens were a kind of marine monsters, which were supposed to
   inhabit certain rocky islands on the south-west coast of Italy, and
   decoyed, it was alleged, by their enchanting music, mariners to their
   destruction. Homer in his Odyssey (8. 45) speaks of their melodious
   song (liguro aoido.) Our Author, it will be observed, in the connection
   in which he alludes to "the songs of the Sirens," strongly expresses
   his belief of the reality of Satanic influence, as contrasted with what
   is merely fabulous. -- Ed

   [342] "Suiets a toutes sortes de vices, sinon entant que le Seigneur
   les reprime au dedans, afin qu'ils ne sortent dehors, et vienent "a
   estre mis en effet;" -- "Liable to all kinds of vices, unless in so far
   as the Lord inwardly restrains them, that they may not break forth
   outwardly, and come to be put in practice."

   [343] "Vne fontnine abondante;" -- "An abundant fountain."
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 6:12-20

   12. All things are lawful unto me, but all things are not expedient:
   all things are lawful for me, but I will not be brought under the power
   of any.

   12. Omnium mihi est potestas, at non omnia conducunt: omnium mihi est
   potestas, sed ego sub nullius [344] redigar potestatem.

   13. Meats for the belly, and the belly for meats: but God shall destroy
   both it and them. Now the body is not for fornication, but for the
   Lord; and the Lord for the body.

   13. Escae ventri, et venter escis: Deus vero et has et ilium destruet.
   Corpus autem non scortationi, sed Domino, et Dominus corpori.

   14. And God hath both raised up the Lord, and will also raise up us by
   his own power.

   14. Porro Deus et Dominum suscitavit, et nos suscitabit per potentiam
   suam.

   15. Know ye not that your bodies are the members of Christ? shall I
   then take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an
   harlot? God forbid.

   15. An nescitis, quod corpora vestra membra sunt Christi? tolthen lens
   igiturmembra Christi, faclam membra meretricis? Absit.

   16. What? know ye not that he which is joined to an harlot is one body?
   for two, saith he, shall be one flesh.

   16. An nescitis, quod qui adhaeret meretrici, unum corpus est? erunt
   enim, inquit, duo in carnem unam.

   17. But he that is joined unto the Lord is one spirit.

   17. Qui antera Domino adhaeret, unus spiritus est.

   18. Flee fornication. Every sin that a man doeth is without the body;
   but he that committeth fornication sinneth against his own body.

   18. Fugite scortationem. Omne peccatum quod commiserit homo, extra
   corpus est: qui autem scortatur, in proprium corpus peccat.

   19. What? know ye not that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost
   which is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own?

   19. An nescitis, quod corpus vestrum templum est Spiritus sancti, qui
   in vobis est, quem habetis a Deo, et non estis vestri?

   20. For ye are bought with a price: therefore glorify God in your body,
   and in your spirit, which are God's.

   20. Empti enim estis pretio: glorificate iam Deum in corpore vestro et
   in spiritu vestro, quae Dei sunt.


   12. All things are lawful for me. Interpreters labor hard to make out
   the connection of these things, [345] as they appear to be somewhat
   foreign to the Apostle's design. For my own part, without mentioning
   the different interpretations, I shall state what, in my opinion, is
   the most satisfactory. It is probable, that the Corinthians even up to
   that time retained much of their former licentiousness, and had still a
   savor of the morals of their city. Now when vices stalk abroad with
   impunity, [346] custom is regarded as law, and then afterwards vain
   pretexts are sought for by way of excuse; an instance of which we have
   in their resorting to the pretext of Christian liberty, so as to make
   almost everything allowable for themselves to do. They reveled in
   excess of luxury. With this there was, as usual, much pride mixed up.
   As it was an outward thing, they did not think that there was any sin
   involved in it: nay more, it appears from Paul's words that they abused
   liberty so much as to extend it even to fornication. Now therefore,
   most appropriately, after having spoken of their vices, he discusses
   those base pretexts by which they flattered themselves in outward sins.

   It is, indeed, certain, that he treats here of outward things, which
   God has left to the free choice of believers, but by making use of a
   term expressive of universality, he either indirectly reproves their
   unbridled licentiousness, or extols God's boundless liberality, which
   is the best directress to us of moderation. For it is a token of
   excessive licentiousness, when persons do not, of their own accord,
   restrict themselves, and set bounds to themselves, amidst such manifold
   abundance. And in the first place, he limits liberty [347] by two
   exceptions; and secondly, he warns them, that it does not by any means
   extend to fornication. These words, All things are lawful for me, must
   be understood as spoken in name of the Corinthians, kat '
   anthupophoran, (by anticipation,) as though he had said, I am aware of
   the reply which you are accustomed to make, when desirous to avoid
   reproof for outward vices. You pretend that all things are lawful for
   you, without any reserve or limitation.

   But all things are not expedient Here we have the first exception, by
   which he restricts the use of liberty -- that they must not abandon
   themselves to licentiousness, because respect must be had to
   edification. [348] The meaning is, "It is not enough that this or that
   is allowed us, to be made use of indiscriminately; for we must consider
   what is profitable to our brethren, whose edification it becomes us to
   study. For as he will afterwards point out at greater length, (1
   Corinthians 10:23, 24,) and as he has already shown in Romans 14:13,
   etc., every one has liberty inwardly [349] in the sight of God on this
   condition, that all must restrict the use of their liberty with a view
   to mutual edification.

   I will not be brought under the power of anything Here we have a second
   restriction -- that we are constituted lords of all things, in such a
   way, that we ought not to bring ourselves under bondage to anything; as
   those do who cannot control their appetites. For I understand the word
   tinos (any) to be in the neuter gender, and I take it as referring, not
   to persons, but to things, so that the meaning is this: "We are lords
   of all things; only we must not abuse that lordship in such a way as to
   drag out a most miserable bondage, being, through intemperance and
   inordinate lusts, under subjection to outward things, which ought to be
   under subjection to us." And certainly, the excessive moroseness of
   those who grudge to yield up anything for the sake of their brethren,
   has this effect, that they unadvisedly put halters of necessity around
   their own necks.

   13. Meats for the belly, and the belly for meats Here he shows what use
   ought to be made of outward things -- for the necessity of the present
   life, which passes away quickly as a shadow, agreeably to what, he says
   afterwards. (1 Corinthians 7:29.) We must use this world so as not to
   abuse it And hence, too, we infer, how improper it is for a Christian
   man to contend for outward things. [350] When a dispute, therefore,
   arises respecting corruptible things, a pious mind will not anxiously
   dwell upon these things; for liberty is one thing -- the use of it is
   another. This statement accords with another -- that

   The kingdom of God is not meat and drink.
   (Romans 14:17.)

   Now the body is not for fornication Having mentioned the exceptions, he
   now states still farther, that our liberty ought not by any means to be
   extended to fornication For it was an evil that was so prevalent at
   that time, that it seemed in a manner as though it had been permitted;
   as we may see also from the decree of the Apostles, (Acts 15:20,)
   where, in prohibiting the Gentiles from fornication, they place it
   among things indifferent; for there can be no doubt that this was done,
   because it was very generally looked upon as a lawful thing. Hence Paul
   says now, There is a difference between fornication and meats, for the
   Lord has not ordained the body for fornication, as he has the belly for
   meats And this he confirms from things contrary or opposite, inasmuch
   as it is consecrated to Christ, and it is impossible that Christ should
   be conjoined with fornication. What he adds -- and the Lord for the
   body, is not without weight, for while God the Father has united us to
   his Son, what wickedness there would be in tearing away our body from
   that sacred connection, and giving it over to things unworthy of
   Christ. [351]

   14. And God hath also raised up the Lord He shows from Christ's
   condition how unseemly fornication is for a Christian man; for Christ
   having been received into the heavenly glory, what has he in common
   with the pollutions of this world? Two things, however, are contained
   in these words. The first is, that it is unseemly and unlawful, that
   our body, which is consecrated to Christ, should be profaned by
   fornication, inasmuch as Christ himself has been raised up from the
   dead, that he might enter on the possession of the heavenly glory. The
   second is, that it is a base thing to prostitute our body [352] to
   earthly pollutions, while it is destined to be a partaker [353] along
   with Christ of a blessed immortality and of the heavenly glory. There
   is a similar statement in Colossians 3:1, If we have risen with Christ,
   etc., with this difference, that he speaks here of the last
   resurrection only, while in that passage he speaks of the first also,
   or in other words, of the grace of the Holy Spirit, by which we are
   fashioned again to a new life. As, however, the resurrection is a thing
   almost incredible (Acts 26:8) to the human mind, when the Scripture
   makes mention of it, it reminds us of the power of God, with the view
   of confirming our faith in it. (Matthew 22:29.)

   15. Know ye not that our bodies are the members, etc. Here we have an
   explanation, or, if you prefer it, an amplification of the foregoing
   statement. For that expression, the body is for the Lord, might, owing
   to its brevity, be somewhat obscure. Hence he says, as if with the view
   of explaining it, that Christ is joined with us and we with him in such
   a way, that we become one body with him. Accordingly, if I have
   connection with an harlot, I tear Christ in pieces, so far as it is in
   my power to do so; for it is impossible for me to draw Him into
   fellowship with such pollution. [354] Now as that must be held in
   abhorrence, [355] he makes use of the expression which he is accustomed
   to employ in reference to things that are absurd -- God forbid [356]
   Observe, that the spiritual connection which we have with Christ
   belongs not merely to the soul, but also to the body, so that we are
   flesh of his flesh, etc (Ephesians 5:30.) Otherwise the hope of a
   resurrection were weak, if our connection were not of that nature --
   full and complete.

   16. Know ye not that he that is joined to an harlot He brings out more
   fully the greatness of the injury that is done to Christ by the man
   that has intercourse with an harlot; for he becomes one body, and hence
   he tears away a member from Christ's body. It is not certain in what
   sense he accommodates to his design the quotation which he subjoins
   from Genesis 2:24. For if he quotes it to prove that two persons who
   commit fornication together become one flesh, he turns it aside from
   its true meaning to what is quite foreign to it. For Moses speaks there
   not of a base and prohibited cohabitation of a man and a woman, but of
   the marriage connection which God blesses. For he shows that that bond
   is so close and indissoluble, that it surpasses the relationship which
   subsists between a father and a son, which, assuredly, can have no
   reference to fornication. This consideration has led me sometimes to
   think, that this quotation is not brought forward to confirm the
   immediately preceding statement, but one that is more remote, in this
   way -- "Moses says, that by the marriage connection husband and wife
   become one flesh, but he that is jointed to the Lord becomes not merely
   one flesh, but one spirit with him." [357] And in this way the whole of
   this passage would tend to magnify the efficacy and dignity of the
   spiritual marriage which subsists between us and Christ.

   If, however, any one does not altogether approve of this exposition, as
   being rather forced, I shall bring forward another. For as fornication
   is the corruption of a divine institution, it has some resemblance to
   it; and what is affirmed respecting the former, may to some extent be
   applied to the latter; not that it may be honored with the praises due
   to the former, [358] but for the purpose of expressing the more fully
   the heinousness of the sin. The expression, therefore, that they two
   become one flesh, is applicable in the true and proper sense to married
   persons only; but it is applied to fornicators, who are joined in a
   polluted and impure fellowship, meaning that contagion passes from the
   one to the other. [359] For there is no absurdity in saying that
   fornication bears some resemblance to the sacred connection of
   marriage, as being a corruption of it, as I have said; but the former
   has a curse upon it, and the other a blessing. Such is the
   correspondence between things that are contrasted in an antithesis. At
   the same time, I would prefer to understand it, in the first instance,
   of marriage, and then, in an improper sense, [360] of fornication, in
   this way -- "God pronounces husband and wife to be one flesh, in order
   that neither of them may have connection with another flesh; so that
   the adulterer and adulteress do, also, become one flesh, and involve
   themselves in an accursed connection. And certainly this is more
   simple, and agrees better with the context.

   17. He that is joined to the Lord. He has added this to show that our
   connection with Christ is closer than that of a husband and wife, and
   that the former, accordingly, must be greatly preferred before the
   latter, so that it must be maintained with the utmost chastity and
   fidelity. For if he who is joined to a woman in marriage ought not to
   have illicit connection with an harlot, much more heinous were this
   crime in believers, who are not merely one flesh with Christ, but also
   one spirit Thus there is a comparison between greater and less.

   18. Flee fornication Every sin, etc. Having set before us honorable
   conduct, he now shows how much we ought to abhor fornication, setting
   before us the enormity of its wickedness and baseness. Now he shows its
   greatness by comparison -- that this sin alone, of all sins, puts a
   brand of disgrace upon the body. The body, it is true, is defiled also
   by theft, and murder, and drunkenness, in accordance with those
   statements --

   Your hands are defiled with blood. (Isaiah 1:15.)

   You have yielded your members instruments of iniquity unto sin,
   (Romans 6:19,)

   and the like. Hence some, in order to avoid this inconsistency,
   understand the words rendered against his own body, as meaning against
   us, as being connected with Christ; but this appears to me to be more
   ingenious than solid. Besides, they do not escape even in this way,
   because that same thing, too, might be affirmed of idolatry equally
   with fornication. For he who prostrates himself before an idol, sins
   against connection with Christ. Hence I explain it in this way, that he
   does not altogether deny that there are other vices, in like manner, by
   which our body is dishonored and disgraced, but that his meaning is
   simply this -- that defilement does not attach itself to our body from
   other vices in the same way [361] as it does from fornication My hand,
   it is true, is defiled by theft or murder, my tongue by evil speaking,
   or perjury, [362] and the whole body by drunkenness; but fornication
   leaves a stain impressed upon the body, such as is not impressed upon
   it from other sins. According to this comparison, or, in other words,
   in the sense of less and more, other sins are said to be without the
   body -- not, however, as though they do not at all affect the body,
   viewing each one by itself.

   19. Know ye not that your body He makes use of two additional
   arguments, in order to deter us from this filthiness. First, That our
   bodies are temples of the Spirit; and, secondly, that the Lord has
   bought us to himself as his property. There is an emphasis implied in
   the term temple; for as the Spirit of God cannot take up his abode in a
   place that is profane, we do not give him a habitation otherwise than
   by consecrating ourselves to him as temples It is a great honor that
   God confers upon us when he desires to dwell in us. (Psalm 132:14.)
   Hence we ought so much the more to fear, lest he should depart from us,
   offended by our sacrilegious actings. [363]

   And ye are not your own. Here we have a second argument -- that we are
   not at our own disposal, that we should live according to our own
   pleasure. He proves this from the fact that the Lord has purchased us
   for himself, by paying the price of our redemption. There is a similar
   statement in Romans 14:9

   To this end Christ died and rose again, that he might be Lord of the
   living and the dead.

   Now the word rendered price may be taken in two ways; either simply, as
   we commonly say of anything that it has cost a price, [364] when we
   mean that it has not been got for nothing; or, as used instead of the
   adverb timios at a dear rate, as we are accustomed to say of things
   that have cost us much. This latter view pleases me better. In the same
   way Peter says,

   Ye are redeemed, not with gold and silver, but with the precious [365]
   blood of the Lamb, without spot. (1 Peter 1:18,19.)

   The sum is this, [366] that redemption must hold us bound, and with a
   bridle of obedience restrain the lasciviousness of our flesh.

   20. Glorify God From this conclusion, it appears that the Corinthians
   took a liberty to themselves in outward things, that it was necessary
   to restrain and bridle. The reproof therefore is this he allows that
   the body is subject to God no less than the soul, and that accordingly
   it is reasonable that both be devoted to his glory. "As it is befitting
   that the mind of a believer should be pure, so there must be a
   corresponding outward profession also before men, inasmuch as the power
   of both is in the hands of God, who has redeemed both." With the same
   view he declared a little ago, that not only our souls but our bodies
   also are temples of the Holy Spirit, that we may not think that we
   discharge our duty to him aright, if we do not devote ourselves wholly
   and entirely to his service, that he may by his word regulate even the
   outward actions of our life.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [344] "D'aucune chose, ou d'aucm;" -- "Of anything, or of any one."

   [345] "A le conioindre avec ce qui a este dit auparauant;" -- "To
   connect it with what has been said before."

   [346] "Or ou on peche a bride auallee, et la ou les vices ne sont point
   corrigez;" -- "Where persons sin with a loose bridle, and where vices
   are not punished."

   [347] "La liberte Chrestienne;" -- "Christian liberty."

   [348] "L'edification du prochain;" -- "The edification of their
   neighbor."

   [349] "En sa conscience;" -- "In his conscience."

   [350] "Il s'en fant que l'homme Chrestien se doyue soncier ne debatre
   pour les choses externes;" -- "A Christian man ought not to be
   solicitous, or to contend for outward things."

   [351] "Choses du tout indignes de Christ;" -- "Things altogether
   unworthy of Christ."

   [352] "C'est vne meschancete d'abandonner nostre corps, et le
   prostituer;" -- "It is wickedness to surrender our body, and prostitute
   it."

   [353] "Estre vn tour participant;" -- "To be one day a participant."

   [354] "Vne pollution si fade et infame;" -- "A pollution so filthy and
   infamous."

   [355] "Pour ce que ceci est vne chose abominable, et que nous deuons
   auoir en horreur;" -- "As that is an abominable thing, and we must hold
   it in abhorrence."

   [356] The original expression, Me geoito! Away with it! corresponds to
   the Hebrew term chllh, far be it! Thus in Genesis 18:25, chllh lk mst
   kdvrhzh, Far be it from thee to act in this manner! Homer makes use of
   a similar expression -- me touto theos teleseien, forbid that heaven
   should accomplish that! (Od. 20. 234.) -- Ed

   [357] "Mais nous sommes faits non seulement vne mesme chair auec le
   Seigneur, auquel nous adherons, mais aussi vn mesme esprit;" -- "But we
   have become not merely one flesh with the Lord, to whom we are joined,
   but also one spirit."

   [358] "Non que la paillardise soit digne de estre ornee des louanges
   qui appartienent a l'ordonnance du marriage;" -- "Not that fornication
   is worthy to be honored with the praises that belong to the ordinance
   of marriage.

   [359] "Pour monstrer que la contagion et vilenie passe de l'vn a
   l'autre;" -- "To show that contagion and pollution pass from the one to
   the other."

   [360] Our Author makes use of the adverb -- abusive, (improperly,)
   referring, it is probable, to the figure of speech called by
   Quinctilian (8. 6) abusio -- the same as catachresis (perversion.) --
   Ed.

   [361] "N'en demeure point tellement imprimee en nostre corps;" -- "Does
   not remain impressed upon our body in the same way."

   [362] "Par mesdisance, detraction, et periure;" -- "By evil-speaking,
   detraction, and perjury."

   [363] "Par nos vilenies plenes de sacrilege;" -- "By our defilements,
   full of sacrilege."

   [364] Thus, exeuriskein, is employed by classical writers to mean --
   getting a thing at a price, that is, at a high price. See Herod. 7.
   119. -- Ed

   [365] Our Author has very manifestly in his eye the epithet timios,
   (precious,) as made use of by the Apostle Peter, in reference to the
   blood of Christ -- timio haimati, hos amnou amomou k. t. l. --
   "precious blood, as of a Lamb without blemish," etc. -- Ed

   [366] "Le sommaire et la substance du propos revient la;" -- "The sum
   and substance of the discourse amount to this."
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 7
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 7:1-2

   1. Now concerning the things whereof ye wrote unto me: It is good for a
   man not to touch a woman.

   1. Porro, de quibus scripsistis mihi, bonum est viro mulierem non
   tangere.

   2. Nevertheless, to avoid fornication, let every man have his own wife,
   and let every woman have her own husband.

   2. Propter fornicationes autem unusquisque uxorem suam habeat, et
   unaquaeque proprium maritum.


   As he had spoken of fornication, he now appropriately proceeds to speak
   of marriage which is the remedy for avoiding fornication. Now it
   appears, that, notwithstanding the greatly scattered state of the
   Corinthian Church, they still retained some respect for Paul, inasmuch
   as they consulted him on doubtful points. What their questions had been
   is uncertain, except in so far as we may gather them from his reply.
   This, however, is perfectly well known, that immediately after the
   first rise of the Church, there crept into it, through Satan's
   artifice, a superstition of such a kind, that a large proportion of
   them, through a foolish admiration of celibacy, [367] despised the
   sacred connection of marriage; nay more, many regarded it with
   abhorrence, as a profane thing. This contagion had perhaps spread
   itself among the Corinthians also; or at least there were idly-disposed
   spirits, who, by immoderately extolling celibacy, endeavored to
   alienate the minds of the pious from marriage. At the same time, as the
   Apostle treats of many other subjects, he intimates that he had been
   consulted on a variety of points. What is chiefly of importance is,
   that we listen to his doctrine as to each of them.

   1. It is good for a man. The answer consists of two parts. In the
   first, he teaches that it were good for every one to abstain from
   connection with a woman, provided it was in his power to do so. In the
   second, he subjoins a correction to this effect, that as many cannot do
   this, in consequence of the weakness of their flesh, these persons must
   not neglect the remedy which they have in their power, as appointed for
   them by the Lord. Now we must observe what he means by the word good,
   when he declares that it is good to abstain from marriage, that we may
   not conclude, on the other hand, that the marriage connection is
   therefore evil -- a mistake which Jerome has fallen into, not so much
   from ignorance, in my opinion, as from the heat of controversy. For
   though that great man was endowed with distinguished excellences, he
   labored, at the same time, under one serious defect, that when
   disputing he allowed himself to be hurried away into great
   extravagancies, so that he did not keep within the bounds of truth. The
   inference then which he draws is this "It is good not to touch a woman:
   it is therefore wrong to do so." [368] Paul, however, does not make use
   of the word good here in such a signification as to be opposed to what
   is evil or vicious, but simply points out what is expedient on account
   of there being so many troubles, vexations, and anxieties that are
   incident to married persons. Besides, we must always keep in view the
   limitation which he subjoins. Nothing farther, therefore, can be
   elicited from Paul's words than this -- that it is indeed expedient and
   profitable for a man not to be bound to a wife, provided he can do
   otherwise. Let us explain this by a comparison. Should any one speak in
   this way: "It were good for a man not to eat, or to drink, or to sleep"
   -- he would not thereby condemn eating, or drinking, or sleeping, as
   things that were wrong -- but as the time that is devoted to these
   things is just so [369] much taken from the soul, his meaning would be,
   that we would be happier if we could be free from these hindrances, and
   devote ourselves wholly [370] to meditation on heavenly things. Hence,
   as there are in married life many impediments which keep a man
   entangled, it were on that account good not to be connected in
   marriage.

   But here another question presents itself, for these words of Paul have
   some appearance of inconsistency with the words of the Lord, in Genesis
   2:18, where he declares, that it is not good for a man to be without a
   wife. What the Lord there pronounces to be evil Paul here declares to
   be good I answer, that in so far as a wife is a help to her husband, so
   as to make his life happy, that is in accordance with God's
   institution; for in the beginning God appointed it so, that the man
   without the woman was, as it were, but half a man, and felt himself
   destitute of special and necessary assistance, and the wife is, as it
   were, the completing of the man. Sin afterwards came in to corrupt that
   institution of God; for in place of so great a blessing there has been
   substituted a grievous punishment, so that marriage is the source and
   occasion of many miseries. Hence, whatever evil or inconvenience there
   is in marriage, that arises from the corruption of the divine
   institution. Now, although there are in the meantime some remains still
   existing of the original blessing, so that a single life is often much
   more unhappy than the married life; yet, as married persons are
   involved in many inconveniences, it is with good reason that Paul
   teaches that it would be good for a man to abstain. In this way, there
   is no concealment of the troubles that are attendant upon marriage; and
   yet, in the meantime, there is no countenance given to those profane
   jests which are commonly in vogue with a view to bring it into
   discredit, such as the following: that a wife is a necessary evil, and
   that a wife is one of the greatest evils. For such sayings as these
   have come from Satan's workshop, and have a direct tendency to brand
   with disgrace God's holy institution; and farther, to lead men to
   regard marriage with abhorrence, as though it were a deadly evil and
   pest.

   The sum is this, that we must remember to distinguish between the pure
   ordinance of God and the punishment of sin, which came in subsequently.
   According to this distinction, it was in the beginning good for a man,
   without any exception, to be joined to a wife, and even yet, it is good
   in such a way, that there is in the meantime a mixture of bitter and
   sweet, in consequence of the curse of God. To those, however, who have
   not the gift of continency, it is a necessary and salutary remedy in
   accordance with what follows.

   2. But to avoid fornication He now commands, that those who are liable
   to the vice of incontinency should have recourse to the remedy. For
   though it may seem that the statement is universal, it ought,
   nevertheless, to be restricted to those who feel themselves urged by
   necessity. As to this, every one must judge for himself. Whatever
   difficulty, therefore, is perceived to be in marriage, let all that
   cannot resist the promptings of their flesh, know that this commandment
   has been enjoined upon them by the Lord. But it is asked -- "Is this
   the only reason for entering into matrimony, that we may cure
   incontinency?" I answer, that this is not Paul's meaning; for as for
   those that have the gift of abstinence from marriage, he leaves them at
   liberty, [371] while he commands others to provide against their
   infirmity by marrying. The sum is this -- that the question is not as
   to the reasons for which marriage has been instituted, but as to the
   persons for whom it is necessary. For if we look to the first
   institution, it could not be a remedy for a disease which had as yet no
   existence, but was appointed for begetting offspring; but after the
   fall, this second purpose was added.

   This passage is also opposed to (tolugamia) polygamy For the Apostle
   desires that every woman have her own husband, intimating that the
   obligation is mutual. The man, therefore, who has once pledged his
   fidelity to a woman as his wife, must not separate from her, as is
   manifestly done in case of a second connection.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [367] "C'est a dire, l'abstinence du mariage;" -- "That is to say,
   abstinence from marriage."

   [368] Our Author, when commenting on Matthew 19:10, animadverts in
   strong terms on Jerome's manner of handling the subject of marriage, as
   discovering "a malicious and wicked disposition." Harmony, [11]volume 2
   p. 386. -- Ed.

   [369] "C'est autant de perdu quant aux choses spirituelles;" -- "It is
   so much of loss as to spiritual things."

   [370] "Nous employer entierement et incessaumment;" -- "Employ
   ourselves entirely and unceasingly."

   [371] "Il laisse la liberte de se marier ou ne se marier point;" -- "He
   gives liberty to marry or not marry."
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 7:3-5

   3. Let the husband render unto the wife due benevolence: and like also
   the wife unto the husband.

   3. Uxori vir debitam benevolentiam vicissim praetet, similiter et uxor
   marito.

   4. The wife hath not power of her own body, but the husband: and
   likewise also the husband hath not power of his own body, but the wife.

   4. Mulier corporis sui potestatem non habet, sed maritus: similiter et
   maritus corporis sui potestatem non habet, sed uxor.

   5. Defraud ye not one the other, except it be with consent for a time,
   that ye may give yourselves to fasting and prayer; and come together
   again, that Satan tempt you not for your incontinency.

   5. Ne fraudetis alter alterum, nisi ex mutuo consensu ad tempus, ut
   vacetis ieiunio et orationi: et rursum in unum redite, ne tentet vos
   Satanas propter incontinentiam vestram.


   3. The husband to the wife. He now prescribes the rules to be observed
   in the marriage connection, or he teaches what is the duty of husband
   and wife. And in the first place he lays down a general doctrine as to
   mutual benevolence -- that the husband love his wife, and the wife her
   husband; for as to the interpretation which others give to the
   expression due benevolence -- duty of marriage -- I do not know how far
   it is suitable. The reason that inclines them to this view is, that it
   is immediately added, The husband has not power of his own body, etc.;
   but it will suit better to regard that as an inference drawn from the
   preceding statement. Husband and wife, therefore, are bound to mutual
   benevolence: hence it follows, that they have, neither the one nor the
   other, the power of their own body. But it may be asked, why the
   Apostle here puts them upon a level, instead of requiring from the wife
   obedience and subjection. I answer, that it was not his intention to
   treat of all their duties, but simply of the mutual obligation as to
   the marriage bed. In other things, therefore, husband and wife differ,
   both as to duty and as to authority in this respect the condition of
   both is alike -- as to the maintaining of conjugal fidelity. For this
   reason, also, polygamy (tolugamia) is again condemned; for if this is
   an invariable condition of marriage, that the husband surrenders the
   power of his own body, and gives it up to his wife, how could he
   afterwards connect himself with another, as if he were free?

   5. Defraud ye not one the other Profane persons might think that Paul
   does not act with sufficient modesty in discoursing in this manner as
   to the intercourse of a husband with his wife; or at least that it was
   unbecoming the dignity of an Apostle. If, however, we consider the
   reasons that influenced him, we shall find that he was under the
   necessity of speaking of these things. In the first place, he knew how
   much influence a false appearance of sanctity has in beguiling devout
   minds, as we ourselves know by experience. For Satan dazzles us with an
   appearance of what is right, that we may be led to imagine that we are
   polluted by intercourse with our wives, and leaving off our calling,
   may think of pursuing another kind of life. Farther, he knew how prone
   every one is to self-love, and devoted to his own gratification. From
   this it comes, that a husband, having had his desire gratified, treats
   his wife not merely with neglect, but even with disdain; and there are
   few that do not sometimes feel this disdain of their wives creep in
   upon them. It is for these reasons that he treats so carefully of the
   mutual obligations of the married life. "If at any time it comes into
   the minds of married persons to desire an unmarried life, as though it
   were holier, or if they are tempted by irregular desires, [372] let
   them bear in mind that they are bound by a mutual connection." The
   husband is but the one half of his body, and so is it, also, as to the
   wife. Hence they have not liberty of choice, but must on the contrary
   restrain themselves with such thoughts as these: "Because the one
   needed help from the other, the Lord has connected us together, that we
   may assist each other." Let each then be helpful to each other's
   necessity, and neither of them act as if at his or her own disposal.

   Unless by mutual consent He requires mutual consent, in the first
   place, because the question is not as to the continency of one merely,
   but of two; and besides, he immediately adds two other exceptions. The
   first is, that it be done only for a time, as perpetual continency is
   not in their power, lest if they should venture to make an attempt
   beyond their power, they might fall before Satan's stratagems. The
   second is, that they do not abstain from conjugal intercourse, on the
   ground of that abstinence being in itself a good and holy work, or as
   if it were the worship of God, [373] but that they may be at leisure
   for better employments. Now though Paul had taken such pains in
   guarding this, yet Satan prevailed so far as to drive [374] many to
   unlawful divorce, from a corrupt desire for an unmarried life. The
   husband, leaving his wife, fled to the desert, that he might please God
   better by living as a monk. The wife, against her husband's will, put
   on the veil -- the badge of celibacy. Meanwhile they did not consider
   that by violating their marriage engagement they broke the Lord's
   covenant, and by loosing the marriage tie, they cast off the Lord's
   yoke.

   This vice, it is true, was corrected in some measure by the ancient
   canons; for they prohibited a husband from leaving his wife against her
   will, on pretense of continency; and in like manner a wife from
   refusing to her husband the use of her body. In this, however, they
   erred -- that they permitted both together to live in perpetual
   celibacy, as if it were lawful for men to decree anything that is
   contrary to the Spirit of God. Paul expressly commands, that married
   persons do not defraud each other, except for a time The bishops give
   permission to leave off the use of marriage for ever. Who does not see
   the manifest contrariety? Let no one, therefore, be surprised, that we
   make free to dissent on this point from the ancients, who, it is
   evident, deviated from the clear statements of the word of God.

   That ye may have leisure for fasting and prayer. We must take notice,
   that Paul does not speak here of every kind of fasting, or every kind
   of prayer. That sobriety and temperance, which ought to be habitual on
   the part of Christians, is a kind of fasting. Prayer, too, ought to be
   not merely daily, but even continual. He speaks, however, of that kind
   of fasting which is a solemn expression of penitence, with the view of
   deprecating God's anger, or by which believers prepare themselves for
   prayer, when they are undertaking some important business. In like
   manner, the kind of prayer that he speaks of is such as requires a more
   intense affection of the mind. [375] For it sometimes happens, that. we
   require (leaving off everything else) to fast and pray; as when any
   calamity is impending, if it appears to be a visitation of God's wrath;
   or when we are involved in any difficult matter, or when we have
   something of great importance to do, as, for example, the ordaining of
   pastors. [376] Now it is with propriety that the Apostle connects these
   two things, because fasting is a preparation for prayer, as Christ also
   connects them, when he says,

   This kind of devils goeth not out but by fasting and prayer. (Matthew
   17:21.)

   When, therefore, Paul says, that ye may be at leisure, the meaning is,
   that having freed ourselves from all impediments, we may apply
   ourselves to this one thing. Now if any one objects, that the use of
   the marriage bed is an evil thing, inasmuch as it hinders prayer, the
   answer is easy -- that it is not on that account worse than meat and
   drink, by which fasting is hindered. But it is the part of believers to
   consider wisely when it is time to eat and drink, and when to fast. It
   is also the part of the same wisdom to have intercourse with their
   wives when it is seasonable, and to refrain from that intercourse when
   they are called to be engaged otherwise.

   And come together again, that Satan tempt you not Here he brings
   forward the reason, from ignorance of which the ancients have fallen
   into error, in rashly and inconsiderately approving of a vow of
   perpetual continency. For they reasoned in this manner: "If it is good
   for married persons sometimes to impose upon themselves for a time a
   voluntary continency with mutual consent, then, if they impose this
   upon themselves for ever, it will be so much the better." But then,
   they did not consider how much danger was involved in this, for we give
   Satan an occasion for oppressing us, when we attempt anything beyond
   the measure of our weakness. [377] "But we must resist Satan." [378]
   What if arms and shield be wanting? "They must be sought from the
   Lord," say they. But in vain shall we beseech the Lord to assist us in
   a rash attempt. We must, therefore, carefully observe the clause -- for
   your incontinency: for we are exposed to Satan's temptations in
   consequence of the infirmity of our flesh. If we wish to shut them out,
   and keep them back, it becomes us to oppose them by the remedy, with
   which the Lord has furnished us. Those, therefore, act a rash part, who
   give up the use of the marriage bed. It is as if they had made an
   agreement with God as to perpetual strength. [379]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [372] "Ou qu'ils soyent tentez de se debaucher en pallardises;" -- "Or
   are tempted to defile themselves with whoredoms."

   [373] "Un seruice agreable a Dieu;" -- "A service agreeable to God."

   [374] "Solicite et induit plusieurs;" -- "Enticed and induced many."

   [375] "L'affection du coeur plus ardente et extraordinaire;" -- "A more
   ardent and extraordinary affection of the mind." See Institutes (volume
   3.)

   [376] "Comme quand on vent elire ou ordonner des pasteurs et
   ministres;" -- "As when persons wish to elect or ordain pastors and
   ministers."

   [377] "Par dessus nos forces, et la mesure de nostre imbecilite;" --
   "Beyond our strength, and the measure of our weakness."

   [378] "Mais (dira quelqu'vn)il faut resister a Satan;" -- "But (some
   will say) we must resist Satan."

   [379] "Qu'il leur donnera tousiours la puissance de s'en passer;" --
   "That he would give them always the power to do without it."
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 7:6-9

   6. But I speak this by permission, and not of commandment.

   6. Hoc autem dico secundum veniam, non secundum praeceptum.

   7. For I would that all men were even as I myself. But every man hath
   his proper gift of God, one after this manner, and another after that.

   7. Optarim enim, omnes homines esse sicut me: sed unusquisque proprium
   donum habet ex Deo, alius sic, alius autem sic.

   8. I say therefore to the unmarried and widows, It is good for them if
   they abide even as I.

   8. Dico autem inconiugatis et viduis: bonum ipsis est, si maneant ut
   ego.

   9. But if they cannot contain, let them marry: for it is better to
   marry than to burn.

   9. Si autem non continent, matrimonium contrahant: melius enim est
   matrimonium contrahere quam uri.


   6. By permission That they might not, by taking their stand upon a
   precept of the kind that he had prescribed, loosen unduly the
   restraints of lust, [380] he adds a limitation -- that he had written
   these things on account of their infirmity -- that they may bear in
   mind that marriage is a remedy for unchastity, lest they should
   inordinately abuse the advantage of it, so as to gratify their desire
   by every means; nay more, without measure or modesty. He has it also in
   view to meet the cavils of the wicked, that no one might have it in his
   power to object in this way: "What! are you afraid that husbands and
   wives will not of their own accord be sufficiently inclined to carnal
   delight that you prompt them to it?" For even the Papists, those little
   saints, [381] are offended with this doctrine, and would gladly have a
   contest with Paul, on the ground of his keeping married persons in
   mutual cohabitation, and not allowing them to turn aside to a life of
   celibacy. He assigns, then, a reason for his doctrine, and declares,
   that he had not recommended connubial intercourse to married persons
   with the view of alluring them to delight, or as though he took
   pleasure in commanding it, but had considered what was required by the
   infirmity of those that he is addressing.

   Foolish zealots [382] for celibacy make a wrong use of both clauses of
   this verse; for as Paul says that he speaks by permission, they infer
   from this, that there is therefore something wrong in conjugal
   intercourse, for where there is need of pardon, [383] there must be
   sin. Farther, from his saying that he speaks not by commandment, they
   infer, that it is, therefore, a holier thing to leave off the use of
   marriage and turn to celibacy. To the former, I answer, that as there
   is, I acknowledge, an inordinate excess in all human affections, I do
   not deny that there is as to this matter an irregularity, (ataxia,)
   [384] which, I allow, is vicious. [385] Nay more, this affection, I
   allow, is beyond others violent, and next to brutish. But, on the other
   hand, I also maintain, that whatever there is of vice or baseness, is
   so covered over by the honorableness of marriage, that it ceases to be
   a vice, or at least is not reckoned a fault by God, as Augustine
   elegantly discourses in his book "On the advantage of Marriage," and
   frequently in other places. You may then take it briefly thus: [386]
   conjugal intercourse is a thing that is pure, honorable and holy,
   because it is a pure institution of God: the immoderate desire with
   which persons burn is a fault arising from the corruption of nature;
   but in the case of believers marriage is a veil, by which that fault is
   covered over, so that it no longer appears in the sight of God. To the
   second I answer: as the term commandment is properly applied to those
   things which relate to the duties of righteousness, and things in
   themselves pleasing to God, Paul on this account says that he does not
   speak by commandment He has, however, sufficiently shown previously,
   that the remedy, which he had enjoined, must necessarily be made use
   of.

   7. For I should wish, that all. This is connected with the exposition
   of the foregoing statement; for he does not fail to intimate, what is
   the more convenient way, but he wishes every one to consider what has
   been given him. [387] Why, then, has he, a little before, spoken not by
   way of commandment? It is for this reason, that he does not willingly
   constrain them to marry, but rather desires that they may be free from
   that necessity. As this, however, is not free to all, he has respect to
   infirmity. If this passage had been duly weighed, that perverse
   superstition connected with the desire of celibacy, which is the root
   and cause of great evils, would never have gained a footing in the
   world. Paul here expressly declares, that every one has not a free
   choice in this matter, because virginity is a special gift, that is not
   conferred upon all indiscriminately. Nor does he teach any other
   doctrine than what Christ himself does, when he says, that

   all men are not capable of receiving this saying.
   (Matthew 19:11.)

   Paul, therefore, is here an interpreter of our Lord's words, when he
   says that this power has not been given to all -- that of living
   without marriage.

   What, in the meantime, has been done? Every one, without having any
   regard to his power, has, according to his liking, vowed perpetual
   continency. Nor has the error as to this matter been confined to the
   common people and illiterate persons; for even the most eminent
   doctors, devoting themselves unreservedly to the commendation of
   virginity, and forgetting human infirmity, have overlooked this
   admonition of Paul -- nay rather, of Christ himself. Jerome, blinded by
   a zeal, I know not of what sort, does not simply fall, but rushes
   headlong, into false views. Virginity, I acknowledge, is an excellent
   gift; but keep it in view, that it is a gift. Learn, besides, from the
   mouth of Christ and of Paul, that it is not common to all, but is given
   only to a few. Guard, accordingly, against rashly devoting what is not
   in your own power, and what you will not obtain as a gift, if forgetful
   of your calling you aspire beyond your limits.

   At the same time the ancients erred even in their estimate of
   virginity, for they extol it as if it were the most excellent of all
   virtues, and wish it to be regarded as the worship of God. [388] Even
   in this there is a dangerous error; and now follows another -- that,
   after celibacy had begun to be so much esteemed, many, vying with each
   other, rashly vowed perpetual continency, while scarcely the hundredth
   part of them were endowed with the power and gift. Hence, too, a third
   sprung up -- that the ministers of the Church were forbidden to enter
   into marriage, as a kind of life unbecoming the holiness of their
   order. [389] As for those who, despising marriage, rashly vowed
   perpetual continency, God punished their presumption, first, by the
   secret flames of lust; [390] and then afterwards, by horrible acts of
   filthiness. The ministers of the Churches being prohibited from lawful
   marriage, the consequence of this tyranny was, that the Church was
   robbed of very many good and faithful ministers; for pious and prudent
   men would not ensnare themselves in this way. At length, after a long
   course of time, lusts, which had been previously kept under, gave forth
   their abominable odor. It was reckoned a small matter for those, in
   whom it would have been a capital crime to have a wife, to maintain
   with impunity concubines, that is, prostitutes; but no house was safe
   from the impurities of the priests. Even that was reckoned a small
   matter; for there sprung up monstrous enormities, which it were better
   to bury in eternal oblivion than to make mention of them by way of
   example. [391]

   8. I say, then, to the unmarried. This depends on what goes before, and
   is a sort of inference from it. He had said that the gifts of God are
   variously distributed -- that continency is not in the power of all,
   and that those who have it not ought to have recourse to the remedy. He
   now directs his discourse to virgins, to all that are unmarried, and to
   widows, and he allows that an unmarried life ought to be desired by
   them, provided they have the power; but that regard must always be had
   by each individual to the power that he possesses. The sum is this,
   that an unmarried life has many advantages, and that these are not to
   be despised, provided every one measures himself according to his own
   size and measure. [392] Hence, though virginity should be extolled even
   to the third heavens, this, at the same time, always remains true --
   that it does not suit all, but only those who have a special gift from
   God. For as to the objection that is brought forward by Papists -- that
   in baptism, also, we promise to God purity of life, which it is not in
   our power to perform, the answer is easy -- that in that we promise
   nothing but what God requires from all his people, but that continency
   is a special gift, which God has withheld from many. Hence those who
   make a vow of continency, act precisely as if any unlearned and
   illiterate person were to set himself off as a prophet, or teacher, or
   interpreter of languages.

   We must also notice carefully the word continue; for it is possible for
   a person to live chastely in a state of celibacy for a time, but there
   must be in this matter no determination made for tomorrow. Isaac was
   unmarried until he was thirty years of age, and passed in chastity
   those years in which the heats of irregular desire are most violent;
   yet afterwards he is called to enter into the married life. In Jacob we
   have a still more remarkable instance. Hence the Apostle would wish
   those who are at present practicing chastity, to continue in it and
   persevere; but as they have no security for the continuance of the
   gift, he exhorts all to consider carefully what has been given them.
   This passage, however, shows that the Apostle was at that time
   unmarried; for as to the inference drawn by Erasmus, that he was
   married, because he makes mention of himself in connection with married
   persons, it is frivolous and silly; for we might, on the same
   principle, infer that he was a widower, [393] because he speaks of
   himself in connection with widows. [394] Now the words intimate, that
   at that time he was unmarried; for I do not give any countenance to the
   conjecture, that he had put away his wife somewhere, and had of his own
   accord abandoned the use of the marriage bed. For where, in that case,
   had been the injunction, [395] Come together again without delay? (1
   Corinthians 7:5.) It would certainly be an absurdity to say, that he
   did not obey his own precepts, and did not observe the law which he
   imposed upon others. It is, however, a singular token of modesty, that,
   while he is himself endowed with the gift of continency, he does not
   require others to bind themselves to his rule, but allows them that
   remedy for infirmity which he dispenses with. Let us, then, imitate his
   example, so that if we excel in any particular gift, we do not
   rigorously insist upon it on the part of others, who have not as yet
   reached that height.

   9. But if they cannot contain While he advises to abstain from
   marriage, he always speaks conditionally -- if it can be done, if there
   is ability; but where the infirmity of the flesh does not allow of that
   liberty, he expressly enjoins marriage as a thing that is not in the
   least doubtful. For this is said by way of commandment, that no one may
   look upon it as mere advice. Nor is it merely fornicators that he
   restrains, but those also who are defiled in the sight of God by inward
   lust; and assuredly he that cannot contain tempts God, if he neglects
   the remedy of marriage. This matter requires -- not advice, but strict
   prohibition.

   For it is better There is not strictly a comparison here, inasmuch as
   lawful marriage is honorable in all things, (Hebrews 13:4,) but, on the
   other hand, to burn is a thing that is exceedingly wrong. The Apostle,
   however, has made use of a customary form of expression, though not
   strictly accurate, as we commonly say: "It is better to renounce this
   world that we may, along with Christ, enjoy the inheritance of the
   heavenly kingdom, than to perish miserably in carnal delights." I
   mention this, because Jerome constructs upon this passage a childish
   sophism [396] -- that marriage is good, inasmuch as it is not so great
   an evil as to burn I would say, if it were a matter of sport, that he
   foolishly amuses himself, but in a matter so weighty and serious, it is
   an impious scoff, unworthy of a man of judgment. Let it then be
   understood, that marriage is a good and salutary remedy, because to
   burn is a most base abomination in the sight of God. We must, however,
   define what is meant by burning; for many are stung with fleshly
   desires, who, nevertheless, do not require forthwith to have recourse
   to marriage. And to retain Paul's metaphor, it is one thing to burn and
   another to feel heat. Hence what Paul here calls burning, is not a mere
   slight feeling, but a boiling with lust, so that you cannot resist. As,
   however, some flatter themselves in vain, by imagining that they are
   entirely free from blame, if they do not yield assent to impure desire,
   observe that there are three successive steps of temptation. For in
   some cases the assaults of impure desire have so much power that the
   will is overcome: that is the worst kind of burning, when the heart is
   inflamed with lust. In some instances, while we are stung with the
   darts of the flesh, it is in such a manner that we make a stout
   resistance, and do not allow ourselves to be divested of the true love
   of chastity, but on the contrary, abhor all base and filthy affections.

   Hence all must be admonished, but especially the young, that whenever
   they are assailed by their fleshly inclinations, they should place the
   fear of God in opposition to a temptation of this sort, cut off all
   inlets to unchaste thoughts, entreat the Lord to give them strength to
   resist, and set themselves with all their might to extinguish the
   flames of lust. If they succeed in this struggle, let them render
   thanks unto the Lord, for where shall we find the man who does not
   experience some molestation from his flesh? but if we bridle its
   violence, before it has acquired the mastery, it is well. For we do not
   burn, though we should feel a disagreeable heat -- not that there is
   nothing wrong in that feeling of heat, but acknowledging before the
   Lord, with humility and sighing, [397] our weakness, we are meanwhile,
   nevertheless, of good courage. To sum up all, so long as we come off
   victorious in the conflict, through the Lord's grace, and Satan's darts
   do not make their way within, but are valiantly repelled by us, let us
   not become weary of the conflict.

   There is an intermediate kind of temptation [398] -- when a man does
   not indeed admit impure desire with the full assent of his mind, but at
   the same time is inflamed with a blind impetuosity, and is harassed in
   such a manner that he cannot with peace of conscience call upon God. A
   temptation, then, of such a kind as hinders one from calling upon God
   in purity, and disturbs peace of conscience, is burning, such as cannot
   be extinguished except by marriage. We now see, that in deliberating as
   to this, one must not merely consider whether he can preserve his body
   free from pollution: the mind also must be looked to, as we shall see
   in a little.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [380] "Leurs affections desordonnees;" -- "Their inordinate
   affections."

   [381] "Les hypocrites qui veulent estre estimez de petis saincts;" --
   "Hypocrites, who wish to be regarded as little saints."

   [382] "Les sots et indiscrets zelateurs;" -- "Foolish and inconsiderate
   zealots."

   [383] "Ou permission et pardon ha lieu;" -- "Where permission and
   pardon have place."

   [384] The term ataxia is used by our author in the Harmony (volume 1)
   to mean disorder, as contrasted with the orderly condition of the
   kingdom of God It contains an allusion to the disorderly conduct of
   soldiers, who quit their ranks It is used in this sense by Thucydides
   (7:43.) -- Ed

   [385] "Vn appetit desmesure, lequel ie concede estre vicieux;" -- "An
   immoderate desire, which, I allow, is vicious."

   [386] "Pour resolution done de ce poinet en peu de paroles, disons en
   ceste sorte;" -- "For a solution, then, of this point in a few words,
   let us express it in this way."

   [387] "Donne de Dieu;" -- "Given by God."

   [388] "Comme vn service agreable a Dieu;" -- "As a service agreeable to
   God."

   [389] "Comme vn estat indigne et non conuenable a la sanctete de
   l'ordre;" -- "As a condition unbefitting, and unsuitable to the
   holiness of their order."

   [390] "De passions et cupiditez desordonnees;" -- "Of inordinate
   passions and lusts."

   [391] The reader will find the same subject largely treated of by our
   author in the Institutes, volume 3. -- Ed.

   [392] "Se mesure a son aulne (comme on dit) c'est a dire, selon sa
   faculte;" -- "Measures himself by his own ell, (as they say,) that is
   to say, according to his ability."

   [393] "Qu'il estoit sans femme," -- "That he was unmarried."

   [394] "Entre ceux qui n'estoyent point mariez;" -- "Among those that
   were unmarried."

   [395] "Car comment se fust-il done acquitte de ce qu'il commande yci
   aux gens mariez?" -- "For how, in that case, would he have discharged
   the duty that he enjoins upon married persons?"

   [396] "Vn sophisme plus que puerile;" -- "A worse than childish
   sophism."

   [397] "Auee pleurs et humilite;" -- "With tears and humility."

   [398] "Il y a vne autre espece de tentation moyenne entre les deux que
   i'ay dites;" -- "There is another kind of temptation, intermediate
   between the two, that I have mentioned."
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 7:10-17

   10. And unto the married I command, yet not I, but the Lord, Let not
   the wife depart from her husband:

   10. Coniugibus denuntio, non ego, sed Dominus: Uxor a marito ne
   discedat.

   11. But and if she depart, let her remain unmarried, or be reconciled
   to her husband: and let not the husband put away his wife.

   11. Quodsi discesserit, maneat innupta, aut viro reconcilietur: et vir
   uxorem ne dimittat.

   12. But to the rest speak I, not the Lord: If any brother hath a wife
   that believeth not, and she be pleased to dwell with him, let him not
   put her away.

   12. Reliquis ego dico, non Dominus: Si quis frater uxorem habet
   infidelem, et ipsa consentit cum eo habitare, ne dimittat eam:

   13. And the woman which hath an husband that believeth not, and if he
   be pleased to dwell with her, let her not leave him.

   13. Et mulier si maritum habet infidelem, et ipse consentit cum ea
   habitare, ne relinquat eum.

   14. For the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the
   unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband: else were your children
   unclean; but now are they holy.

   14. Sanctificatus est enim vir infidelis in uxore: et sanctificata est
   uxor incredula in viro: alioque liberi vestri immundi essent: nunc
   autem sancti sunt.

   15. But if the unbelieving depart, let him depart. A brother or a
   sister is not under bondage in such cases: but God hath called us to
   peace.

   15. Quod si infidelis discedit, discedat: non enim subiectus est
   servituti frater ant soror in talibus, in pace autem vocavit nos Deus.

   16. For what knowest thou, O wife, whether thou shalt save thy husband?
   or how knowest thou, O man, whether thou shalt save thy wife?

   16. Quid enim scis, mulier, an maritum servatura sis? ant quid scis, O
   vir, an uxorem sis servaturus?

   17. But as God hath distributed to every man, as the Lord hath called
   every one, so let him walk. And so ordain I in all churches.

   17. Nisi unusquisque ut ei gratiam divisit Dominns, sic ambulet: et sic
   in Ecclesiis omnibus praecipio.


   10. To the married I command. He now treats of another condition of
   marriage -- its being an indissoluble tie. Accordingly, he condemns all
   those divorces that were of daily occurrence among the heathens, and
   were not punished among the Jews by the law of Moses. Let not, says he,
   the husband put away his wife, and let not the wife depart from her
   husband. Why? Because they are joined together by an indissoluble bond.
   It is surprising, however, that he does not make an exception, at least
   in case of adultery; for it is not likely that he designed to curtail
   in anything the doctrine of Christ. To me it appears clear, that the
   reason why he has made no mention of this [399] is, that as he is
   discoursing of these things only in passing, he chose rather to send
   back the Corinthians to the Lord's permission or prohibition, than to
   go over everything in detail. For when persons intend to teach anything
   in short compass, they content themselves with a general statement.
   Exceptions are reserved for a minuter and more extended and particular
   discussion.

   But as to what he subjoins -- not I, but the Lord -- he intimates by
   this correction, that what he teaches here is taken from the law of
   God. For other things that he taught he had also from the revelation of
   the Spirit; but he declares that God is the author of this, in respect
   of its being expressly taken from the law of God. If you inquire as to
   the particular passage, you will nowhere find it in so many words; but
   as Moses in the beginning testifies, that the connection between a
   husband and wife is so sacred, that for the sake of it

   a man ought to leave his father and mother. (Genesis 2:24.)

   It is easy to gather from this, how inviolable a connection it is. For
   by right of nature a son is bound to his father and mother, and cannot
   shake off that yoke. As the connection of marriage is preferred to that
   bond, much less ought it to be dissolved.

   11. But if she depart That this is not to be understood of those who
   have been put away for adultery, is evident from the punishment that
   followed in that case; for it was a capital crime even by the Roman
   laws, and almost by the common law of nations. But as husbands
   frequently divorced their wives, either because their manners were not
   congenial, or because their personal appearance did not please them, or
   because of some offense; [400] and as wives, too, sometimes deserted
   their husbands on account of their cruelty, or excessively harsh and
   dishonorable treatment, he says that marriage is not dissolved by
   divorces or dissensions of that nature. For it is an agreement that is
   consecrated by the name of God, which does not stand or fall according
   to the inclination of men, so as to be made void whenever we may
   choose. The sum is this: other contracts, as they depend on the mere
   inclination of men, are in like manner dissolved by that same
   inclination; but those who are connected by marriage are no longer
   free, so as to be at liberty, if they change their mind, to break in
   pieces the pledge, [401] (as the expression is,) and go each of them
   elsewhere in quest of a new connection. For if the rights of nature
   cannot be dissolved, much less can this, which, as we have said
   already, is preferred before the principal tie of nature.

   But as to his commanding the wife, who is separated from her husband,
   to remain unmarried, he does not mean by this that separation is
   allowable, nor does he give permission to the wife to live apart from
   her husband; but if she has been expelled from the house, or has been
   put away, she must not think that even in that case she is set free
   from his power; for it is not in the power of a husband to dissolve
   marriage. He does not therefore give permission here to wives to
   withdraw, of their own accord, from their husbands, or to live away
   from their husband's establishment, as if they were in a state of
   widowhood; but declares, that even those who are not received by their
   husbands, continue to be bound, so that they cannot take other
   husbands.

   But what if a wife is wanton, or otherwise incontinent? Would it not be
   inhuman to refuse her the remedy, when, constantly burning with desire?
   I answer, that when we are prompted by the infirmity of our flesh, we
   must have recourse to the remedy; after which it is the Lord's part to
   bridle and restrain our affections by his Spirit, though matters should
   not succeed according to our desire. For if a wife should fall into a
   protracted illness, the husband would, nevertheless, not be justified
   in going to seek another wife. In like manner, if a husband should,
   after marriage, begin to labor under some distemper, it would not be
   allowable for his wife to change her condition of life. The sum is this
   -- God having prescribed lawful marriage as a remedy for our
   incontinency, let us make use of it, that we may not, by tempting him,
   pay the penalty of our rashness. Having discharged this duty, let us
   hope that he will give us aid should matters go contrary to our
   expectations.

   12. To the rest I say By the rest he means those who are exceptions, so
   that the law, common to others, is not applicable to them; for an
   unequal marriage is on a different footing, when married persons differ
   among themselves in respect of religion; Now this question he solves in
   two clauses. The first is, that the believing party ought not to
   withdraw from the unbelieving party, and ought not to seek divorce,
   unless she is put away. The second is, that if an unbeliever put away
   his wife on account of religion, a brother or a sister is, by such
   rejection, freed from the bond of marriage. But why is it that Paul
   speaks of himself as the author of these regulations, while they appear
   to be somewhat at variance with what he had, a little before, brought
   forward, as from the Lord? He does not mean that they are from himself
   in such a way as not to be derived from the Spirit of God; but, as
   there was nowhere in the law or in the Prophets any definite or
   explicit statement on this subject, he anticipates in this way the
   calumnies of the wicked, in claiming as his own what he was about to
   state. At the same time, lest all this should be despised as the
   offspring of man's brain, we shall find him afterwards declaring, that
   his statement are not the contrivances of his own understanding. There
   is, however, nothing inconsistent with what goes before; for as the
   obligation and sanctity of the marriage engagement depend upon God,
   what connection can a pious woman any longer maintain with an
   unbelieving husband, after she has been driven away through hatred of
   God?

   14. For the unbelieving husband is sanctified He obviates an objection,
   which might occasion anxiety to believers. The relationship of marriage
   is singularly close, so that the wife is the half of the man -- so that
   they two are one flesh -- (1 Corinthians 6:16) -- so that the husband
   is the head of the wife; (Ephesians 5:23;) and she is her husband's
   partner in everything; hence it seems impossible that a believing
   husband should live with an ungodly wife, or the converse of this,
   without being polluted by so close a connection. Paul therefore
   declares here, that marriage is, nevertheless, sacred and pure, and
   that we must not be apprehensive of contagion, as if the wife would
   contaminate the husband. Let us, however, bear in mind, that he speaks
   here not of contracting marriages, but of maintaining those that have
   been already contracted; for where the matter under consideration is,
   whether one should marry an unbelieving wife, or whether one should
   marry an unbelieving husband, then that exhortation is in point --

   Be not yoked with unbelievers, for there is no agreement between Christ
   and Belial. (2 Corinthians 6:14.)

   But he that is already bound has no longer liberty of choice; hence the
   advice given is different.

   While this sanctification is taken in various senses, I refer it simply
   to marriage, in this sense -- It might seem (judging from appearance)
   as if a believing wife contracted infection from an unbelieving
   husband, so as to make the connection unlawful; but it is otherwise,
   for the piety of the one has more effect in sanctifying marriage than
   the impiety of the other in polluting it. Hence a believer may, with a
   pure conscience, live with an unbeliever, for in respect of the use and
   intercourse of the marriage bed, and of life generally, he is
   sanctified, so as not to infect the believing party with his impurity.
   Meanwhile this sanctification is of no benefit to the unbelieving
   party; it only serves thus far, that the believing party is not
   contaminated by intercourse with him, and marriage itself is not
   profaned.

   But from this a question arises -- "If the faith of a husband or wife
   who is a Christian sanctifies marriage, it follows that all marriages
   of ungodly persons are impure, and differ nothing from fornication." I
   answer, that to the ungodly all things are impure, (Titus 1:15,)
   because they pollute by their impurity even the best and choicest of
   God's creatures. Hence it is that they pollute marriage itself, because
   they do not acknowledge God as its Author, and therefore they are not
   capable of true sanctification, and by an evil conscience abuse
   marriage. It is a mistake, however, to conclude from this that it
   differs nothing from fornication; for, however impure it is to them, it
   is nevertheless pure in itself, inasmuch as it is appointed by God,
   serves to maintain decency among men, and restrains irregular desires;
   and hence it is for these purposes approved by God, like other parts of
   political order. We must always, therefore, distinguish between the
   nature of a thing and the abuse of it.

   Else were your children It is an argument taken from the effect -- "If
   your marriage were impure, then the children that are the fruit of it
   would be impure; but they are holy; hence the marriage also is holy.
   As, then, the ungodliness of one of the parents does not hinder the
   children that are born from being holy, so neither does it hinder the
   marriage from being pure." Some grammarians explain this passage as
   referring to a civil sanctity, in respect of the children being
   reckoned legitimate, but in this respect the condition of unbelievers
   is in no degree worse. That exposition, therefore, cannot stand.
   Besides, it is certain that Paul designed here to remove scruples of
   conscience, lest any one should think (as I have said) that he had
   contracted defilement. The passage, then, is a remarkable one, and
   drawn from the depths of theology; for it teaches, that the children of
   the pious are set apart from others by a sort of exclusive privilege,
   so as to be reckoned holy in the Church.

   But how will this statement correspond with what he teaches elsewhere
   -- that we are all by nature children of wrath; (Ephesians 2:3;) or
   with the statement of David -- Behold I was conceived in sin, etc.
   (Psalms 51:5.) I answer, that there is a universal propagation of sin
   and damnation throughout the seed of Adam, and all, therefore, to a
   man, are included in this curse, whether they are the offspring of
   believers or of the ungodly; for it is not as regenerated by the
   Spirit, that believers beget children after the flesh. The natural
   condition, therefore, of all is alike, so that they are liable equally
   to sin and to eternal death. As to the Apostle's assigning here a
   peculiar privilege to the children of believers, this flows from the
   blessing of the covenant, by the intervention of which the curse of
   nature is removed; and those who were by nature unholy are consecrated
   to God by grace. Hence Paul argues, in his Epistle to the Romans,
   (Romans 11:16,) that the whole of Abraham's posterity are holy, because
   God had made a covenant of life with him -- If the root be holy, says
   he, then the branches are holy also. And God calls all that were
   descended from Israel his sons' now that the partition is broken down,
   the same covenant of salvation that was entered into with the seed of
   Abraham [402] is communicated to us. But if the children of believers
   are exempted from the common lot of mankind, so as to be set apart to
   the Lord, why should we keep them back from the sign? If the Lord
   admits them into the Church by his word, why should we refuse them the
   sign? In what respects the offspring of the pious are holy, while many
   of them become degenerate, you will find explained in the tenth and
   eleventh chapters of the Epistle to the Romans; and I have handled this
   point there.

   15. But if an unbeliever depart. This is the second department of his
   statement, in which he sets at liberty a believing husband, who is
   prepared to dwell with an unbelieving wife, but is rejected by her, and
   in like manner a woman who is, without any fault on her part,
   repudiated by her husband; for in that case the unbelieving party makes
   a divorce with God rather than with his or her partner. There is,
   therefore, in this case a special reason, inasmuch as the first and
   chief bond is not merely loosed, but even utterly broken through. While
   some are of opinion that we are at this day situated in a much similar
   way with Papists, [403] we ought to consider wisely what difference
   there is between the two cases, that we may not attempt anything
   rashly.

   In peace. Here, too, interpreters differ; for some take it in this way
   -- "We are called in peace: let us therefore avoid all ground and
   occasion of quarrels." I take it in a more simple way: "Let us, so far
   as we can, cultivate peace with all, to which we have been called. We
   must not, therefore, rashly separate from unbelievers, unless they
   first make a divorce. God, therefore, has called us in peace to this
   end, that we might cultivate peace with all, by acting properly towards
   every one." This, then, belongs to the former department of his
   statement -- that

   believers ought to remain with unbelievers, if they are pleased, etc.,
   (1 Corinthians 7:12 and 13,)

   because a desire for divorce is at variance with our profession.

   16. For what knowest thou, O woman? Those who are of opinion that this
   observation is a confirmation of the second department of his
   statement, expound it thus. "An uncertain hope ought not to detain
   thee," etc. But, in my opinion, the exhortation is taken from the
   advantage to be derived; for it is a great and distinguished blessing
   if a wife gain (1 Corinthians 9:19) her husband. Now, unbelievers are
   not in so hopeless a condition but that they may be brought to believe.
   They are dead, it is true, but God can even raise the dead. So long,
   therefore, as there remains any hope of doing good, and the pious wife
   knows not but that she may by her holy conversation (1 Peter 3:1) bring
   back her husband into the way, [404] she ought to try every means
   before leaving him; for so long as a man's salvation is doubtful, it
   becomes us to be prepared rather to hope the best.

   As to his saying, however, that a husband may be saved by his wife, the
   expression, it is true, is not strictly accurate, as he ascribes to man
   what belongs to God; but there is no absurdity in it. For as God acts
   efficaciously by his instruments which he makes use of, he does, in a
   manner, communicate his power to them, or, at least, he connects it
   with their service in such a manner, that what he does he speaks of as
   being done by them, and hence, too, he sometimes ascribes to them the
   honor which is due to himself alone. Let us, however, bear in mind,
   that we have nothing in our power, except in so far as we are directed
   by him as instruments.

   17. Unless every one, according as God has dispensed his grace, etc.
   Such is the literal meaning: only I have in my rendering made use of
   the nominative, [405] in order that the connection may be more easy and
   natural. The meaning is: "What, then, is to be done, unless [406] that
   every one walk according to the grace given to him, and according to
   his calling? Let every one, therefore, labor for this, and use his
   endeavor, that he may do good to his neighbors, and, more especially,
   when he ought to be excited to it by the particular duty of his
   calling." He mentions two things -- the calling, and the measure of
   grace These he desires us to look to in deliberating as to this matter;
   as it ought to be no small stimulus to us to duty, that God condescends
   to make us ministers of his grace for the salvation of our brethren;
   while the calling, on the other hand, should hold us, as it were, under
   God's yoke, even where an individual feels his situation to be an
   unpleasant one.

   And so in all the Churches. I am of opinion that he added this, with
   the view of obviating the calumnies of some who boasted that he assumed
   more authority over the Corinthians than he ventured to do over others.
   At the same time he might have also another end in view -- that this
   doctrine might have the more weight, when the Corinthians understood
   that it was already published in all the Churches. For we embrace the
   more readily what we understand that we have in common with all the
   pious. The Corinthians, on the other hand, would have felt it hateful
   to be bound more closely than others.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [399] "Il n'a pas voulu toucher ce poinct;" -- "He has not chosen to
   touch upon this point."

   [400] "Pource qu'elles n'estoyent assez belles, ou pour quelque autre
   despit ou desplaisir;" -- "Because they were not handsome enough, or on
   the ground of some other offense or dislike."

   [401] The phrase used by our Author -- frangant tesseram -- (break the
   pledge) contains an allusion to the custom among the Romans of having,
   on occasion of a league of hospitality being formed, a tally (tessera)
   or piece of wood cut into two parts, of which each party kept one. If
   either of the parties acted inconsistently with the engagement, he was
   said -- confregisse resseraph -- to have broken the pledge. See Plaut.
   Cist. 2. 1:27. -- Ed.

   [402] "Auec Abraham, et auec la semence;" -- "With Abraham and with his
   seed."

   [403] "Que nous auons auiourd'huy semblable cause de nous departir
   d'avec les Papistes;" -- "That we have at this day similar ground of
   separation from Papists."

   [404] "Au bon chemin;" -- "Into the good way."

   [405] "Our Author refers to the word hekastos, (every one,) which
   occurs in the first clause of the verse in the dative case, and in the
   second clause in the accusative, and in both instances rendered by him
   in the nominative -- unusquisque (every one.) -- Ed

   [406] The particles which occur in the original, ei me, (unless,) might
   in this passage, and in several other instances in the New Testament,
   (as well as in classical writers,) be rendered only They correspond to
   the Hebrew particles 'm-l'. See Genesis 24:38. -- Ed
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 7:18-24

   18. Is any man called being circumcised? let him not become
   uncircumcised. Is any called in uncircumcision? let him not be
   circumcised.

   18. Circumcisus aliquis vocatus est? ne arcessat praeputium: in
   praeputio aliquis vocatus est? ne circumcidatur.

   19. Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but the
   keeping of the commandments of God.

   19. Circumcisio nihil est, et praeputium nihil est, sed observatio
   mandatorum Dei.

   20. Let every man abide in the same calling wherein he was called.

   20. Unusquisque in qua vocatione fuit vocatus, maneat.

   21. Art thou called being a servant? care not for it: but if thou
   mayest be made free, use it rather.

   21. Servus vocatus es? ne sit tibi curae: at si etiam possis liber
   fieri, magis utere.

   22. For he that is called in the Lord, being a servant, is the Lord's
   freeman: likewise also he that is called being free, is Christ's
   servant.

   22. Etenim qui in Domino vocatus est servus, libertus Domini est:
   similiter et qui liber vocatus est, servus est Christi.

   23. Ye are bought with a price; be not ye the servants of men.

   23. Pretio empti estis: nolite fieri servi hominum.

   24. Brethren, let every man, wherein he is called, therein abide with
   God.

   24. Unusquisque in eo, in quo vocatus est, fratres, maneat apud Deum.


   18. Circumcised, etc. As he had made mention of the calling, he takes
   occasion, from a particular instance, to make a digression for a little
   into a general exhortation, as he is wont to do in many instances; and,
   at the same time, he confirms, by different examples, what he had said
   respecting marriage. The sum is this, that in external things you must
   not rashly abandon the calling on which you have once entered by the
   will of God. And he begins with circumcisions, respecting which many at
   that time disputed. Now, he says that with God it makes no difference
   whether you are a Gentile or a Jew. Hence he exhorts every one to be
   contented with his condition. It must always be kept in view, that he
   treats only of lawful modes of life, which have God as their approver
   and author.

   19. Circumcision is nothing While this similitude was suited to the
   subject in hand, it appears to have been designedly made use of with
   the view of reproving, in passing, the superstition and haughtiness of
   the Jews. For, as the Jews gloried in circumcision, it was possible
   that many might feel dissatisfied with the want of it, as if their
   condition were the worse on that account. Paul, therefore, places both
   conditions upon a level, lest, through hatred of the one, the other
   should be foolishly desired. These things, however, must be understood
   as referring to the time when circumcision was at length abolished;
   for, if he had had an eye to the covenant of God, and his commandment,
   he would, without doubt, have estimated it higher. In another passage,
   it is true, he makes light of the letter of circumcision, (Romans
   2:27,) and declares that it is of no account in the sight of God; but
   here, as he simply contrasts circumcision with uncircumcision, and
   makes both alike, it is certain that he speaks of it as a matter of
   indifference and of no moment. For the abolishing of it has this effect
   -- that the mystery which had been previously conveyed under it, does
   not now any longer belong to it: nay more, it is now no longer a sign,
   but a thing of no use. For baptism has come in the place of the symbol
   used under the law on this footing, that it is enough that we be
   circumcised by the Spirit of Christ, while our old man is buried with
   Christ.

   But the keeping of the commandments As this was one of the
   commandments, so long as the Church was bound to legal ceremonies, we
   see that it is taken for granted, that circumcision had been abolished
   by the advent of Christ, so that the use of it, indeed, was allowed
   among the ignorant and weak, but advantage in it -- there was none. For
   Paul speaks of it here as a thing of no moment: "As these are outward
   things, let them not take up your attention, but devote yourself rather
   to piety and the duties which God requires, and which are alone
   precious in his sight." As to the circumstance that Papists bring
   forward this passage for the purpose of overthrowing justification by
   faith, it is utterly childish; for Paul is not disputing here as to the
   ground of justification, or the way in which we obtain it, but simply
   as to the object to which the aim of believers ought to be directed.
   "Do not occupy yourselves to no purpose in things of no profit, but, on
   the contrary, exercise yourselves in duties that are well pleasing to
   God."

   20. Every man in the calling in which. This is the source from which
   other things are derived, -- that every one should be contented with
   his calling, and pursue it, instead of seeking to betake himself to
   anything else. A calling in Scripture means a lawful mode of life, for
   it has a relation to God as calling us, [407] -- lest any one should
   abuse this statement [408] to justify modes of life that are evidently
   wicked or vicious. But here it is asked, whether Paul means to
   establish any obligation, [409] for it might seem as though the words
   conveyed this idea, that every one is bound to his calling, so that he
   must not abandon it. Now it were a very hard thing if a tailor [410]
   were not at liberty to learn another trade, or if a merchant were not
   at liberty to betake himself to farming. I answer, that this is not
   what the Apostle intends, for he has it simply in view to correct that
   inconsiderate eagerness, which prompts some to change their condition
   without any proper reason, whether they do it from superstition, or
   from any other motive. Farther, he calls every one to this rule also --
   that they bear in mind what is suitable to their calling He does not,
   therefore, impose upon any one the necessity of continuing in the kind
   of life which he has once taken up, but rather condemns that
   restlessness, which prevents an individual from remaining in his
   condition with a peaceable mind [411] and he exhorts, that every one
   stick by his trade, as the old proverb goes.

   21. Art thou called being a servant? We see here that Paul's object
   [412] is to satisfy their consciences; for he exhorts servants to be of
   good cheer, and not be cast down, as if servitude were a hinderance in
   the way of their serving God. Care not for it then, that is to say, be
   not concerned how you may throw off the yoke, as if it were a condition
   unbecoming a Christian, but be contented in mind. And hence we infer,
   not merely that it is owing to the providence of God that there are
   different ranks and stations in the world, but also, that a regard to
   them is enjoined by his word.

   But if thou mayest even be made free The particle even (in my opinion)
   has simply this force, -- "If, in place of servitude, you could attain
   even to liberty, it would be more advantageous for you." It is
   uncertain, however, whether he continues his discourse to servants, or
   turns to address those that are free. In the latter case, genesthai
   would here mean simply to be Either meaning suits sufficiently well,
   and they amount to the same thing. He means to intimate, that liberty
   is not merely good, but also more advantageous than servitude. If he is
   speaking to servants, his meaning will be this -- While I exhort you to
   be free from anxiety, I do not hinder you from even availing yourselves
   of liberty, if an opportunity presents itself to you. If he is
   addressing himself to those that are free, it will be a kind of
   concession, as though he had said -- I exhort servants to be of good
   courage, though a state of freedom is preferable, [413] and more to be
   desired, if one has it in his choice.

   22. For he that is called in the Lord, being a servant To be called in
   the Lord, being a servant, is to be chosen out of the rank of servants,
   and made a partaker of the grace of Christ. Now this statement is
   designed to furnish consolation to servants, and, at the same time, to
   beat down the haughtiness of those that are free-born. As servants feel
   their situation irksome, in respect of their being mean and despicable,
   it is of importance that the bitterness of servitude be alleviated by
   some consolation. Those, on the other hand, that are free, need to be
   restrained, in order that they may not be unduly elated on account of
   their more honorable condition, and be lifted up with pride. The
   Apostle does both; for he teaches, that as the liberty of the spirit is
   greatly preferable to the liberty of the flesh, servants ought to feel
   the unpleasantness of their condition the more tolerable, when they
   take into view that inestimable gift with which they have been endowed;
   and, on the other hand, that those who are free ought not to be puffed
   up, inasmuch as their condition in the principal respect is not
   superior to that of servants. We must not, however, infer from this,
   that those that are free are made inferior to servants, or that
   political order is subverted. The Apostle saw what suited both. Those
   that were free required (as I have said) to be restrained, that they
   might not in a wanton manner triumph over servants. To servants, on the
   other hand, some consolation required to be administered, that they
   might not be disheartened. Now these things tend rather to confirm
   political order, while he teaches that the inconvenience of the flesh
   is compensated by a spiritual benefit.

   23. Yea are bought with a price We had these words in the preceding
   chapter, (1 Corinthians 6:20,) but for a different purpose. As to the
   word price, I have stated there, what is my view of it. The sum is
   this, that he exhorts servants, indeed, not to be anxious as to their
   condition, but wishes them rather to take heed not to subject
   themselves to the wicked or depraved inclinations of their masters. "We
   are holy to the Lord, because he has redeemed us: let us, therefore,
   not defile ourselves for the sake of men, as we do when we are subject
   to their corrupt desires." This admonition was very necessary at that
   time, when servants were driven by threats and stripes, and even fear
   of death, to obey every kind of command without selection or exception,
   so that they reckoned the procuring of prostitutes, and other crimes of
   that nature, to be duties belonging to servants, equally with honorable
   employment's. It is, therefore, not without reason that Paul makes this
   exception -- that they are not to yield obedience in things base and
   wicked. Would that this were thoroughly and entirely impressed upon the
   minds of all! There would not, in that case, be so many that prostitute
   themselves to the lusts of men, as if exposed for sale. As for us, let
   us bear in mind, that we belong to him who has redeemed us.

   24. Let him abide with God. I have already noticed above, that men are
   not here bound by a perpetual necessity, so as never to have it in
   their power to change their condition, if at any time there should be a
   fit occasion for it; but that he simply represses those thoughtless
   humors, which hurry men hither and thither, so that they are harassed
   by a continual restlessness. Hence Paul says, that it is all one in the
   sight of God what a person's manner of life is in this world, inasmuch
   as this diversity does not hinder agreement in piety.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [407] "Car d'autant que ce nom vient d'vn mot qui signifie Appeler, il
   ha vne correspondance mutuelle a Dieu, qui nous appelle a ceci ou a
   cela;" -- "For as this term comes from a word which signifies to call,
   it has a mutual relationship to God, who calls us to this or that."

   [408] "Ceque ie di, afinque nul n'abuse ceste sentence;" -- "Which
   thing I say, in order that no one may abuse this statement."

   [409] "Vne obligation et necessite;" -- "An obligation and necessity."

   [410] "Vn cordonnier;" -- "A shoemaker."

   [411] "Paisiblement, et en repos de conscience;" -- "Peaceably, and
   with quiet of conscience."

   [412] "Tout le but a quoy tend Sainct Paul;" -- "The whole object at
   which St. Paul aims."

   [413] "Soit beaucoup meilleur;" -- "Is much better."
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 7:25-28

   25. Now concerning virgins I have no commandment of the Lord: yet I
   give my judgment, as one that hath obtained mercy of the Lord to be
   faithful.

   25. De virginibus autem praeceptum Domini non habeo: sed consilium do,
   tanquam misericordiam consequutus a Domino, ut sim fidelis.

   26. I suppose therefore that this is good for the present distress, I
   say, that it is good for a man so to be.

   26. Arbitror igitur hoc bonum esse propter instantem necessitatem, quod
   bonum sit homini sic esse.

   27. Art thou bound unto a wife? seek not to be loosed. Art thou loosed
   from a wife? seek not a wife.

   27. Alligatus es uxori? ne quaeras solutionem. Solutus es ab uxore? ne
   quaeras uxorem

   28. But and if thou marry, thou hast not sinned; and if a virgin marry,
   she hath not sinned. Nevertheless such shall have trouble in the flesh:
   but I spare you.

   28. Quodsi etiam duxeris uxorem, non peccasti: et si nupserit virgo,
   non peccavit: attamen afflictionem in carne habebunt eiusmodi. Ego
   autem vobis parco.


   25. Concerning virgins He now returns to treat of marriage, of which he
   had begun to speak in the commencement of the chapter. What he is now
   about to state he had previously touched upon, but briefly and somewhat
   obscurely. He accordingly intimates more explicitly what his views are
   respecting virginity; but as it is a matter that is liable to be
   misapprehended, and is full of difficulties, he always speaks, as we
   shall see, conditionally. Virgins here I understand as meaning
   virginity. As to this, he says he has no commandment of the Lord;
   because the Lord does not in any part of the Scriptures declare what
   persons ought to remain unmarried. Nay, on the contrary, inasmuch as
   the Scripture says, that

   male and female were created together, (Genesis 2:21,)

   it seems as if it called every one equally and without exception to
   marriage: [414] at least celibacy is nowhere enjoined upon any one, or
   commended.

   He says that he gives advice, not as if there were anything doubtful in
   it, and had little or no stability, but as being certain, and deserving
   to be maintained without any controversy. The word, too, that he
   employs, gnome, signifies not merely advice, but a decisive judgment.
   [415] Papists, however, rashly infer from this, that it is allowable to
   go beyond the limits of God's word, since nothing was farther from
   Paul's intention than to go beyond the limits of God's word for if any
   one attends more closely, he will see, that Paul here advances nothing
   but what is included in what Christ says in Matthew 5:32, and Matthew
   19:5; but in the way of anticipating an objection, he acknowledges that
   he has no express precept in the law, pointing out who ought to marry,
   and who not

   Having obtained mercy to be faithful. He secures authority for his
   decision, that no one may think himself at liberty to reject it, if he
   chooses. For he declares that he does not speak simply as a man, but as
   a faithful teacher of the Church, and an Apostle of Christ. According
   to his custom, he declares himself to be indebted for this to the mercy
   of God, [416] as it was no common honor, nay superior to all human
   merits. Hence it appears, that whatever things have been introduced
   into the Church by human authority, [417] have nothing in common with
   this advice of Paul. But faithful here means truthful -- one who does
   not do what he does merely from pious zeal, but is also endowed with
   knowledge, so as to teach with purity and faithfulness For it is not
   enough for a teacher to be conscientious, if he has not also prudence
   and acquaintance with the truth.

   26. I think therefore that this is good. While I translate this passage
   of Paul's writings differently from Erasmus or the Vulgate, I at the
   same time do not differ from them as to its meaning. They divide Paul's
   words in such a way, that the same thing is repeated twice. I, on the
   other hand, make it simply one proposition, and not without authority,
   for I follow ancient and approved manuscripts, which make it all one
   sentence, with merely a colon between. The meaning is this: "I think it
   expedient on account of the necessity, with which the saints are always
   harassed in this life, that all should enjoy the liberty and advantage
   of celibacy, as this would be of advantage to them." There are some,
   however, that view the term necessity as referring to the age of the
   Apostle, which was, undoubtedly, full of trouble to the pious: but he
   appears to me to have had it rather in view to express the disquietude
   with which the saints are incessantly harassed in the present life. I
   view it, therefore, as extending to all ages, and I understand it in
   this way, that the saints are often, in this world, driven hither and
   thither, and are exposed to many and various tempests, [418] so that
   their condition appears to be unsuitable for marriage. The phrase so to
   be, signifies to remain unmarried, or to abstain from marriage.

   27. Art thou bound to a wife? Having stated what would be most
   advantageous, he adds at the same time, that we ought not to be so much
   influenced by the advantages of celibacy, that one that is bound by the
   tie of marriage should shake off the connection. It is therefore a
   restriction upon the preceding statement, lest any one, influenced by
   his commendation of celibacy, should turn his thoughts to it, and
   despise marriage, forgetful of his necessity or of his calling Now in
   these words he does not merely forbid the breaking up of the connection
   of marriage, but also represses the dislikes that are wont to creep in,
   that every one may continue to live with his wife willingly and
   cheerfully.

   Art thou loosed from a wife? This second clause must be taken with a
   reservation, as is manifest from the entire context. He does not, then,
   allow to all the choice of perpetual celibacy, but only to those to
   whom it is given. Let no one, therefore, who is not constrained by any
   necessity, rashly ensnare himself, for liberty ought not to be lightly
   thrown away. [419]

   28. But if thou shouldest even marry. As there was a danger of one's
   thinking from the preceding statement, that he tempted God, if he
   knowingly and willingly bound himself to marriage, (as that would be to
   renounce his liberty,) he removes this scruple; for he gives liberty to
   widows to marry, and says, that those that marry do not sin. The word
   even also seems to be emphatic -- to intimate, that even though there
   be no positive necessity urging to it, the unmarried are not prohibited
   from marrying whenever they may see fit.

   And if a virgin marry Whether this is an amplification, or simply an
   illustration, this, in the first place, is beyond all controversy, that
   Paul designed to extend the liberty of marriage to all. Those who think
   that it is an amplification, are led to think so by this, that it seems
   to approach nearer to a fault, and is more open to reprehension, or at
   least has more occasion of shame, to loose the virgin girdle (as the
   ancients express themselves) than, upon the death of a husband, to
   enter into a second marriage. The argument then would be this: "If it
   is lawful for a virgin to marry, much more may widows." I am rather of
   opinion, that he makes both equal in this way: "As it is allowable for
   a virgin, so is it for widows also." For second marriages among the
   ancients were not without some mark of reproach, as they adorned those
   matrons, who had contented themselves with one marriage during their
   whole life, with a chaplet of chastity [420] -- an honor that tended to
   reflect reproach upon those that had married repeatedly. And it is a
   well known saying of Valerius, [421] that "it betokens a legitimate
   excess [422] when a second marriage is desired." The Apostle,
   therefore, makes virgins and widows alike as to liberty of marriage.

   Nevertheless such shall have trouble in the flesh. He frequently
   repeats the reason why he leans more to the side of celibacy in his
   exhortations, lest he should seem to prefer the one condition to the
   other on its own account, rather than on account of its consequences.
   He says, that there are many troubles that are connected with the
   married life, and that on that account he wishes all to be free from
   marriage, who desire to be exempt from troubles. When he says, that
   they will have trouble of the flesh, or in the flesh, he means, that
   the anxieties and distresses in which married persons are involved
   arise from the affairs of the world. The flesh, therefore, is taken
   here to mean the outward man. To spare means to indulge, or to wish
   them to be exempted from the troubles that are connected with marriage.
   "I am desirous to make provision for your infirmity, that you may not
   have trouble: now marriage brings with it many troubles. This is the
   reason why I should wish you not to require to marry -- that you may be
   exempt from all its evils." Do not, however, infer from this that Paul
   reckons marriage to be a necessary evil for those troubles of which he
   speaks do not arise so much from the nature of marriage, as from the
   corruption of it, for they are the fruits of original sin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [414] "Appelle indifferemment et sans exception tous hommes et femmes a
   se marier;" -- "Calls all men and women indiscriminately and without
   exception to marry."

   [415] Such is the view that Beza takes of the meaning of the term here
   -- "Sententiam in hac re meam dico;" -- "I give you my authoritative
   decision as to this matter." -- Ed.

   [416] The original word, eleemenos, which has occasioned no
   inconsiderable difficulty to interpreters, is ingeniously supposed by
   Granville Penn, in his Supplemental Annotations, to be a dialectic
   variation of elemenos, for eilemenos, bound, (from eileo, to bind,) in
   which case the meaning would be this: "as one bound by the Lord to be
   faithful." Taking the word in this light, the expression is much
   similar to what we find employed by the Apostle in a subsequent chapter
   of this Epistle -- ananke gar moi epikeitai, necessity is laid upon me
   (1 Corinthians 9:16.) -- Ed

   [417] "Du cerueau des hommes;" -- "From man's brain."

   [418] "Diuerses afflictions et orages;" -- "Various afflictions and
   tempests."

   [419] "Car il ne faut pas quitter legerement sa liberte sans y bien
   penser;" -- "For he ought not to abandon his liberty lightly, without
   thinking much as to it."

   [420] In accordance with this, Univira, (the wife of one husband,) is
   often found in ancient inscriptions as an epithet of honor. -- Ed.

   [421] "Autheur aneien;" -- "An ancient author."

   [422] "C'est a dire, coloree et reglee par les lois;" -- "That is to
   say, colored over and regulated by the laws."
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 7:29-35

   29. But this I say, brethren, the time is short: it remaineth, that
   both they that have wives be as though they had none;

   29. Hoc autem dico, fratres, quia [423] tempus contractum est: reliquum
   est, ut qui uxores habent, sint tanquam non habentes:

   30. And they that weep, as though they wept not; and they that rejoice,
   as though they rejoiced not; and they that buy, as though they
   possessed not;

   30. Et qui flent, tanquam non flentes: et qui gaudent, tanquam non
   gandentes: et qui emunt, tanquam non possidentes:

   31. And they that use this world, as not abusing it: for the fashion of
   this world passeth away.

   31. Et qui utuntur hoc mundo, tanquam non utentes: praeterit enim
   figura mundi hujus.

   32. But I would have you without carefulness. He that is unmarried
   careth for the things that belong to the Lord, how he may please the
   Lord:

   32. Velim autem vos absque solicitudine esse. Qui coelebs est, curat ea
   quae sunt Domini, quomodo placiturus sit Domino:

   33. But he that is married careth for the things that are of the world,
   how he may please his wife.

   33. Coniugatus curat ea quae sunt mundi, qualiter uxori placiturus sit,
   et divisus est.

   34. There is difference also between a wife and a virgin. The unmarried
   woman careth for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in
   body and in spirit: but she that is married careth for the things of
   the world, how she may please her husband

   34. Et mulier caelebs, et virgo curat ea quae sunt Domini, ut sancta
   sit corpore et spiritu: at quae maritum habet, curat ea quae sunt
   mundi, quomodo placitura sit marito.

   35. And this I speak for your own profit; not that I may cast a snare
   upon you, but for that which is comely, and that ye may attend upon the
   Lord without distraction.

   35. Hoc autem ad utilitatem vestram dico, non ut laqueum vobis
   iniiciam, sed ad honestatem ac decorum, ut Domino adhaereatis absque
   ulla distractione.


   29. Because the time is short, etc. Again he discourses respecting the
   holy use of marriage, for the purpose of repressing the wantonness of
   those who, when they have married, think of nothing but the delights of
   the flesh. They have no remembrance of God. Hence he exhorts believers
   not to give way to unbridled desire in such a way, that marriage should
   have the effect of plunging them into the world. Marriage is a remedy
   for incontinency. It has really the effect, if it be used with
   moderation. He therefore exhorts married persons to live together
   chastely in the fear of the Lord. This will be effected, if marriage is
   made use of by them, like other helps of this earthly life, having
   their hearts directed upwards to meditation on the heavenly life. Now,
   he draws his argument from the shortness of human life: "This life,"
   says he, "which we are now spending is frail, and of short duration.
   Let us not therefore be held entangled by it. Let those accordingly who
   have wives, be as though they had none." Every one, it is true, has
   this philosophy in his mouth, but few have it truly and in good earnest
   impressed upon their minds. In my first translation, I had followed a
   manuscript, to which (as I afterwards discovered) not one of the many
   others gave any countenance. I have accordingly deemed it proper to
   insert the particle because, to make the meaning more apparent, and in
   accordance also with the reading in some ancient copies. For as in
   those cases in which we are deliberating as to anything, we look to the
   future rather than to the past, he admonishes us as to the shortness of
   the time that is to come.

   As though they had none All things that are connected with the
   enjoyment of the present life are sacred gifts of God, but we pollute
   them when we abuse them. If the reason is asked, we shall find it to be
   this, that we always dream of continuance in the world, for it is owing
   to this that those things which ought to be helps in passing through it
   become hindrances to hold us fast. Hence, it is not without good
   reason, that the Apostle, with the view of arousing us from this
   stupidity, calls us to consider the shortness of this life, and infers
   from this, that we ought to use all the things of this world, as if we
   did not use them. For the man who considers that he is a stranger in
   the world uses the things of this world as if they were another's --
   that is, as things that are lent us for a single day. The sum is this,
   that the mind of a Christian ought not to be taken up with earthly
   things, or to repose in them; for we ought to live as if we were every
   moment about to depart from this life. By weeping and rejoicing, he
   means adversity and prosperity; for it is customary to denote causes by
   their effects. [424] The Apostle, however, does not here command
   Christians to part with their possessions, but simply requires that
   their minds be not engrossed in their possessions. [425]

   31. And they that use this world In the first clause there is the
   participle chromenoi (using,) in the second, there is a compound of it
   -- katachromenoi (abusing.) Now the preposition kata in a compound
   state is generally taken in a bad sense, or at least denotes intensity.
   [426] Paul, therefore, directs us to a sober and frugal use of things,
   such as may not impede or retard our course, but may allow of our
   always hastening forward toward the goal.

   For the fashion of this world passeth away By the term here used, the
   Apostle has elegantly expressed the vanity of the world. "There is
   nothing," says he, "that is firm or solid; [427] for it is a mere show
   or outward appearance, as they speak." He seems, however, to have had
   an allusion to theatrical representations, in which, on the curtain
   being drawn up in a single moment, a new appearance is presented, and
   those things that held the eyes of the spectators in astonishment, are
   immediately withdrawn from their view. I do not see why it is that
   Erasmus has preferred the term habitus (form.) He certainly, in my
   opinion, obscures Paul's doctrine; for the term fashion is tacitly
   opposed to substance. [428]

   32. But I would wish you. He returns to the advice which he had spoken
   of, (1 Corinthians 7:25,) but had not as yet fully explained, and in
   the outset he pronounces, as he is wont, a commendation upon celibacy,
   and then afterwards allows every one the liberty of choosing what he
   may consider to suit him best. It is not, however, without good reason
   that he returns so frequently to proclaim the advantages of celibacy,
   for he saw that the burdens of matrimony were far from light. The man
   who can exempt himself from them, ought not to refuse such a benefit,
   and it is of advantage for those who resolve to marry, to be forewarned
   of those inconveniences, that they may not afterwards, on meeting with
   them unexpectedly, give way to despondency. This we see happens to
   many, for having promised themselves unmixed honey, on being
   disappointed in that expectation, they are very readily cast down by
   the slightest mishap. [429] Let them know, therefore, in good time,
   what they have to expect, that they may be prepared to endure
   everything patiently. The meaning is this: "Marriage brings along with
   it hindrances, from which I should wish you to be free and exempt."

   As, however, he has previously made use of the term trouble, (1
   Corinthians 7:28,) and now makes mention of cares or anxieties, it may
   admit of doubt whether they have a different signification, or not. I
   am of opinion that the trouble referred to is what arises from things
   of a distressing nature, such as loss of children, widowhood, quarrels,
   and little differences, (as lawyers speak,) [430] many occasions of
   dislike, faults of children, difficulty in bringing up a family, and
   the like. The anxieties, on the other hand, are, in my opinion,
   connected with things that are joyful, as for example marriage
   fooleries, jests, and other things with which married persons are taken
   up. [431]

   He that is unmarried careth for the things of the Lord. Mark the kind
   of exemption from anxieties that he desires in behalf of Christians --
   that they may devote to the Lord all their thoughts and aims. This, he
   says, belongs to celibacy; and therefore he desires all to enjoy this
   liberty. He does not mean, however, that it is invariably so in
   unmarried life, as experience shows it to be quite otherwise in
   priests, monks, and nuns, than whose celibacy nothing can be conceived
   to be farther from God. Add to this the many base fornicators who
   abstain from marriage for the very purpose of having greater liberty
   for the indulgence of lust, and that their vice may not appear. Where
   there is burning, (1 Corinthians 7:9,) no love of God can exist. But
   Paul's meaning is this -- that an unmarried person is free, and is not
   hindered from thinking of the things of God. The pious make use of this
   liberty. Others turn everything to their own destruction.

   33. He that is married careth for the things of the world. By the
   things of the world you must understand the things that belong to the
   present life; for the world is taken here to mean the condition of this
   earthly life. But from this someone will infer, that all, therefore,
   who are married are strangers to the kingdom of God, [432] as thinking
   of nothing but this earth. I answer, that the Apostle speaks only of a
   portion of the thoughts, as though he had said: "They have one eye
   directed to the Lord, but in such a way as to have the other directed
   to their wife; for marriage is like a burden, by which the mind of a
   pious man is weighed down, so that he does not move God-ward with so
   much alacrity." Let us always, however, bear in mind, that these evils
   do not belong to marriage, but proceed from the depravity of men. Hence
   the calumnies of Jerome, [433] who scrapes together all these things
   for the purpose of bringing marriages into disrepute, fall. For, were
   any one to condemn agriculture, merchandise, and other modes of life,
   on this ground, that amidst so many corruption's of the world, there is
   not one of them that is exempt from certain evils, who is there that
   would not smile at his folly? Observe, then, that whatever evil there
   is in marriage, has its origin somewhere else; for at this day a man
   would not have been turned away from the Lord by the society of his
   wife, if he had remained in a state of innocence, and had not corrupted
   the holy institution of God; but a wife would have been a help-meet to
   him in everything good, as she was created for that end. (Genesis
   2:18.)

   But some one will say: "If anxieties that are faulty and blameworthy
   are invariably connected with marriage, how is it possible for married
   persons to call upon God, and serve him, with a pure conscience?" I
   answer, that there are three kinds of anxieties. There are some that
   are evil and wicked in themselves, because they spring from distrust.
   Of these Christ speaks in Matthew 6:25: There are others that are
   necessary, and are not displeasing to God; as, for example, it becomes
   the father of a family to be concerned for his wife and children, and
   God does not mean that we should be mere stumps, so as to have no
   concern as to ourselves. The third class are a mixture of the two
   former; when we are anxious respecting those things as to which we
   ought to feel anxiety, but feel too keenly excited, in consequence of
   that excess which is natural to us. Such anxieties, therefore, are not
   by any means wrong in themselves, but they are corrupt, in consequence
   of ataxia, that is to say, undue excess. And the Apostle did not intend
   merely to condemn here those vices by which we contract guilt in the
   sight of God, but he desires in a general way, that we may be freed
   from all impediments, so as to be wholly at leisure for the service of
   God.

   And is divided. It is surprising how there has come to be so much
   diversity upon this passage. For the common Greek version is so widely
   different from the old Latin translation, that the diversity cannot be
   ascribed to mistake or inadvertence, in the way in which a mistake
   often happens in a single letter or a single word. Now the Greeks
   commonly read it literally, "He that is married thinks of the things of
   the world, how he may please his wife: a married woman and a virgin are
   divided: She that is unmarried, thinketh of the things of the Lord,"
   etc. And being divided they understand as meaning to differ, as if it
   had been said: "There is a great difference between a married woman and
   a virgin; for the one is at leisure to attend to the things of God
   exclusively, while the other is taken up with various matters." But as
   this interpretation is somewhat at variance with the simple meaning of
   the word, I do not approve of it, especially as the meaning of the
   other reading (which is found also in some Greek manuscripts) is more
   suitable and less forced. We may, accordingly, understand it in this
   manner -- that a man who is married is divided, [434] inasmuch as he
   devotes himself partly to God and partly to his wife, and is not wholly
   and exclusively God's.

   34. The unmarried woman and the virgin. What he had laid down as to men
   he now declares in like manner as to women -- that virgins and widows
   are not prevented by earthly things from devoting their whole cares and
   their whole affections to God. Not that all act this part, but that
   there is opportunity for it, if the mind is so disposed. When he says,
   that she may be holy in body and in spirit, he shows what kind of
   chastity is true and acceptable to God -- when the mind is kept
   unpolluted in the sight of God. Would to God that this were more
   carefully attended to! As to the body, we see what kind of devotement
   to the Lord there commonly is on the part of monks, nuns, and the whole
   scum of the Papistical clergy, than whose celibacy nothing can be
   imagined that is more obscene. [435] But not to speak at present of
   chastity of body, where is there one to be found among those that are
   held in admiration in consequence of their reputation for continency,
   that does not burn with base lusts? We may, however, infer from this
   statement of Paul, that no chastity is well pleasing to God that does
   not extend to the soul as well as to the body Would to God that those
   who prate in such haughty terms as to continency, did but understand
   that they have to do with God! They would not be so confident in their
   contendings with us. At the same time, there are none in the present
   day who dispute on the subject of continency in more magnificent style
   than those who are openly and in the most shameless manner guilty of
   fornication. But though they should conduct themselves ever so
   honorably in the sight of men, that is nothing, if they do not keep
   their minds pure and exempt from all uncleanness.

   35. And this for your benefit. Observe the Apostle's moderation. [436]
   Though he knew the vexations, troubles, and difficulties of the married
   life, and, on the other hand, the advantages of celibacy, yet he does
   not venture to prescribe. On the contrary, having commended celibacy,
   and being afraid that some of his readers might be led away by such
   commendations, and might straightway say within themselves what the
   Apostles said in reply to Christ -- It is good, therefore, so to be,
   (Matthew 19:10) [437] -- not in the meantime taking into view their
   ability, he here declares in express terms, that he points out, indeed,
   what is most advantageous, but does not wish to impose a necessity upon
   any one.

   And here you have two things worthy of observation. The first is, for
   what purpose celibacy is to be desired -- not on its own account, nor
   on the ground of its being a state that is nearer to perfection, but
   that we may cleave to God without distraction -- that being the one
   thing that a Christian man ought exclusively to look to during his
   whole life. The second thing is, that no snare must be put upon men's
   consciences, so as to keep back any one from marriage, but that every
   one must have liberty allowed him. It is well known what grievous
   errors have been fallen into on both these points. As to the second
   point, those assuredly have been bolder than Paul, who have not shrunk
   from passing a law respecting celibacy, with the view of prohibiting
   the whole of the clergy from matrimony. The same may be said of those
   who have made vows of perpetual continency, which are snares by which
   not a few myriads of souls have been drawn into endless ruin. Hence, if
   the Holy Spirit has spoken by the mouth of Paul, Papists cannot clear
   themselves from the crime of fighting against God, (Acts 5:39,) while
   binding men's consciences in a matter in which He designed that they
   should remain free unless, perhaps, He [438] has since that time
   adopted a new plan, so as to construct a snare, which he had previously
   disapproved of.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [423] "Ou, Mais ie vous di ceci, mes freres, que le temps;" -- "Or, But
   I say this to you, my brethren, that the time."

   [424] "Or de prosperite s'ensuit ioye, comme d'aduersitez pleurs;" --
   "Now joy is attendant on prosperity, as tears are on adversities."

   [425] "Enterrez en icelles;" -- "Buried in them."

   [426] "Tellement que le mot signifie yci, Abusans, ou Vsans trop;" --
   "So that the word means here abusing, or using too much." The verb
   katachraomai, is frequently made use of by classical writers to mean
   using to the uttermost, using up, or misusing See Dem 430, 10, and Lys
   153, 46. -- Ed

   [427] "En ce monde;" -- "In this world."

   [428] "Comme s'il disoit, que ce monde n'ha point vn estre, mais
   seulement vne monstre et vaine apparence;" -- "As if he had said, that
   this world has not an existence, but only a show and mere appearance."

   [429] "Qu'ils puissent rencontrer;" -- "That they may meet with."

   [430] "Qui sourdent entre le man et la femme;" -- "that arise between a
   husband and wife."

   [431] Our Author's meaning is, that while thlipsis (trouble) invariably
   relates to what is of a distressing nature, merimna (care) is applied
   to anything that takes up the attention of the mind. -- Ed

   [432] "Forclos du royaume de Dieu;" -- "Shut out from the kingdom of
   God."

   [433] See Harmony, volume 2.

   [434] Kypke (in his Observationes Sacrae) renders the original word
   memepistai, as Calvin does -- divided or perplexed, and brings forward
   a passage from Achilles Tatius, in which ememeristo is used in a
   similar sense. In the Syriac version, on the other hand, the rendering
   is as follows: Discrimen autem est inter mulierem et virginem -- There
   is a difference between a wife and a virgin The Greek commentators
   interpret the clause thus: -- Memeristai, tout ' estin, diapherousin
   allelon, kai ou ten auten echousi phrontida -- They differ from one
   another and have not the same care Bloomfield considers divided or
   distracted to be a harsh interpretation, and not agreeable to the
   context, and renders the clause -- "There is a difference between." --
   Ed

   [435] "Plus infame et puante;" -- "More infamous and abominable."

   [436] "La prudence et moderation de l'Apostre;" -- "The prudence and
   moderation of the Apostle."

   [437] Our author, quoting from memory, gives the substance of the
   passage referred to, while the words which he employs correspond with
   what we find in the 26th verse of this chapter. -- Ed.

   [438] "Le Sainct Esprit;" -- "The Holy Spirit."
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 7:36-38

   36. But if any man think that he behaveth himself uncomely toward his
   virgin, if she pass the flower of her age, and need so require, let him
   do what he will, he sinneth not: let them marry.

   36. Si quis autem virgini suae indecorum iudicat, si excedat florem
   aetatis, et ita fieri debet: quod voluerit faciat, non peccat: nubant.

   37. Nevertheless he that standeth steadfast in his heart, having no
   necessity, but hath power over his own will, and hath so decreed in his
   heart that he will keep his virgin, doeth well.

   37. Qui autem stat firmus in corde, necessitatem non habens, potestatem
   vero habens supra sua voluntate, et hoc decrevit in corde suo, servare
   suam virginem, bene facit.

   38. So then he that giveth her in marriage doeth well; but he that
   giveth her not in marriage doeth better.

   38. Itaque et qui nuptum collocat, bene facit; et qui non collocat,
   melius facit.


   36. But if any one thinketh that it were unseemly for his virgin. He
   now directs his discourse to parents, who had children under their
   authority. For having heard the praises of celibacy, and having heard
   also of the inconveniences of matrimony, they might be in doubt,
   whether it were at all a kind thing to involve their children in so
   many miseries, lest it should seem as if they were to blame for the
   troubles that might befall them. For the greater their attachment to
   their children, so much the more anxiously do they exercise fear and
   caution on their account. [439] Paul, then, with the view of relieving
   them from this difficulty, teaches that it is their duty to consult
   their advantage, exactly as one would do for himself when at his own
   disposal. [440] Now he still keeps up the distinction, which he has
   made use of all along, so as to commend celibacy, but, at the same
   time, to leave marriage as a matter of choice; and not simply a matter
   of choice, but a needful remedy for incontinency, which ought not to be
   denied to any one. In the first part of the statement he speaks as to
   the giving of daughters in marriage, and he declares that those do not
   sin in giving away their daughters in marriage, who are of opinion that
   an unmarried life is not suitable for them.

   The word aschemonein (to be unseemly) must be taken as referring to a
   special propriety, which depends on what is natural to the individual;
   for there is a general propriety, which philosophers make to be a part
   of temperance. That belongs equally to all. There is another, that is
   special, because one thing becomes one individual that would not be
   seemly in another. Every one therefore should consider (as Cicero
   observes) what is the part that nature has assigned to him. [441]
   Celibacy will be seemly for one, but he must not measure all by his own
   foot; [442] and others should not attempt to imitate him without taking
   into view their ability; for it is the imitation of the ape -- which is
   at variance with nature. If, therefore, a father, having duly
   considered his daughter's disposition, is of opinion that she is not
   prepared for celibacy, let him give her away in marriage. [443]

   By the flower of her age he means the marriageable age. This lawyers
   define to be from twelve to twenty years of age. Paul points out, in
   passing, what equity and humanity ought to be exercised by parents, in
   applying a remedy in that tender and slippery age, when the force of
   the disease requires it. And it requires to be so. In this clause I
   understand him as referring to the girl's infirmity -- in the event of
   her not having the gift of continency; for in that case, necessity
   constrains her to marry. As to Jerome's making a handle of the
   expression sinneth not, for reviling marriage, with a view to its
   disparagement, as if it were not a praiseworthy action to dispose of a
   daughter in marriage, it is quite childish. [444] For Paul reckoned it
   enough to exempt fathers from blame, that they might not reckon it a
   cruel thing to subject their daughters to the vexations connected with
   marriage.

   37. But he who standeth firm in his heart. Here we have the second part
   of the statement, in which he treats of young women who have the gift
   of abstaining from marriage. He commends therefore those fathers who
   make provision for their tranquillity; but let us observe what he
   requires. In the first place, he makes mention of a steadfast purpose
   -- If any one has fully resolved with himself. You must not, however,
   understand by this the resolution formed by monks -- that is, a
   voluntary binding over to perpetual servitude -- for such is the kind
   of vow that they make; but he expressly makes mention of this firmness
   of purpose, because mankind often contrive schemes which they next day
   regret. As it is a matter of importance, he requires a thoroughly
   matured purpose.

   In the second place he speaks of the person as having no necessity; for
   many, when about to deliberate, bring obstinacy with them rather than
   reason. And in the present case [445] they do not consider, when they
   renounce marriage, what is in their power, but reckon it enough to say
   -- "such is my choice." Paul requires them to have power, that they may
   not decide rashly, but according to the measure of the grace that has
   been given them. The absence of necessity in the case he appropriately
   expresses in the following clause, when he says that they have power
   over their own will. For it is as though he had said -- "I would not
   have them resolve before knowing that they have power to fulfill, for
   it is rash and ruinous [446] to struggle against an appointment of
   God." But, "according to this system," some one will say, "vows are not
   to be condemned, provided these conditions were annexed." I answer
   that, as to the gift of continency, as we are uncertain respecting the
   will of God as to the future, we ought not to form any determination
   for our whole life. Let us make use of the gift as long as it is
   allowed us. In the meantime, let us commit ourselves to the Lord,
   prepared to follow whithersoever he may call us (Revelation 14:4.)

   Hath decreed in his heart. Paul seems to have added this to express the
   idea more fully, that fathers ought to look carefully on all sides,
   before giving up anxiety and intention as to giving away their
   daughters in marriage. For they often decline marriage, either from
   shame or from ignorance of themselves, while, in the meantime, they are
   not the less wanton, or prone to be led astray [447] Parents must here
   consider well what is for the interests of their daughters, that by
   their prudence they may correct their ignorance, or unreasonable
   desire.

   Now this passage serves to establish the authority of parents, which
   ought to be held sacred, as having its origin in the common rights of
   nature. Now if in other actions of inferior moment no liberty is
   allowed to children, without the authority of their parents, much less
   is it reasonable that they should have liberty given them in the
   contracting of marriage. And that has been carefully enacted by civil
   law, but more especially by the law of God. So much the more
   detestable, then, is the wickedness of the Pope, who, laying aside all
   respect, either for Divine or human laws, has been so daring as to free
   children from the yoke of subjection to their parents. It is of
   importance, however, to mark the reason. This, says he, is on account
   of the dignity of the sacrament. Not to speak of the ignorance of
   making marriage a sacrament, what honor is there, I beseech you, or
   what dignity, when, contrary to the general feeling of propriety in all
   nations, and contrary to God's eternal appointment, they take off all
   restraints from the lusts of young persons, that they may, without any
   feeling of shame, sport themselves, [448] under pretense of its being a
   sacrament? Let us know, therefore, that in disposing of children in
   marriage, the authority of parents is of first-rate importance,
   provided they do not tyrannically abuse it, as even the civil laws
   restrict it. [449] The Apostle, too, in requiring exemption from
   necessity, [450] intimated that the deliberations of parents ought to
   be regulated with a view to the advantage of their children. Let us
   bear in mind, therefore, that this limitation is the proper rule --
   that children allow themselves to be governed by their parents, and
   that they, on the other hand, do not drag their children by force to
   what is against their inclination, and that they have no other object
   in view, in the exercise of their authority, than the advantage of
   their children.

   38. Therefore he that giveth in marriage. Here we have the conclusion
   from both parts of the statement, in which he states, in a few words,
   that parents are free from blame if they give away their daughters in
   marriage, while he at the same time declares that they do better if
   they keep them at home unmarried. You are not, however, to understand
   that celibacy is here preferred to marriage, otherwise than under the
   exception which was a little before expressed. For if power be wanting
   on the part of the daughter, [451] the father acts an exceedingly bad
   part if he endeavors to keep her back from marriage, and would be no
   longer a father to her, but a cruel tyrant. The sum of the whole
   discussion amounts to this -- that celibacy is better than marriage,
   because it has more liberty, so that persons can serve God with greater
   freedom; but at the same time, that no necessity ought to be imposed,
   so as to make it unlawful for individuals to marry, if they think
   proper; and farther, that marriage itself is a remedy appointed by God
   for our infirmity, [452] which all ought to use that are not endowed
   with the gift of continency. Every person of sound judgment will join
   with me in acknowledging and confessing, that the whole of Paul's
   doctrine on this point is comprehended in these three articles.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [439] "Tant plus ils craignent qu'il ne leur adviene quelque
   inconvenient, et tant plus sont ils diligens a se donner garde pour
   eux;" -- "So much the more do they fear lest they should meet with any
   inconvenience, and so much the more careful are they to use precautions
   on their account."

   [440] "Quand il n'est point sous la puissance d'autruy;" -- "When he is
   not under the power of another."

   [441] "La condition et propriete que nature luy a donnee;" -- "The
   condition and propriety that nature has assigned to him." See Cic. de
   Off. 1. 28. -- Ed.

   [442] "Comme on dit;" -- "As they say."

   [443] Calvin seems to have understood the verb aschemonein here as
   meaning to be unseemly The ordinary meaning of the word is, to act in
   an unseemly manner It occurs in this sense in 1 Corinthians 13:5, and
   in various instances in the Classics, (see Eur. Hec. 407,) and the
   construction of the passage seems to require that it be understood as
   meaning, that the father thinks that he acts improperly towards his
   virgin daughter, or incurs somewhat of disgrace with respect to her. --
   Ed

   [444] "C'est vne cauillation puerile;" -- "It is a childish cavil."

   [445] "Et mesme quand il est question du propos dont il est yci fait
   mention;" -- "And even when there is a doubt on the subject, of which
   he has here made mention."

   [446] "Vne arrogance pernicieuse;" -- "pernicious arrogance."

   [447] "Elles ne sont de rien moins suiettes a affections desordonnees,
   ou a estre seduites et abusees;" -- "They are not at all the less
   liable to inordinate affections, or to be seduced and deceived."

   [448] "S'esgayent et desbauchent;" -- "Sport and debauch themselves."

   [449] "Comme aussi a ceste fin les loix ciuiles restraigment
   l'authorite d'iceux;" -- "As also for this end civil laws restrict
   their authority."

   [450] "En requirant yci que les enfans sentent en eux ceste liberte et
   exemption de la necessite du mariage;" -- "In requiring here that
   children feel in themselves this freedom and exemption from the
   necessity of marriage."

   [451] "Car quand la puissance defaudra a la fille de s'abstenir de
   mariage;" -- "For when the daughter has not power to abstain from
   marriage."

   [452] "Pour subuenir a nostre infirmite;" -- "To help our infirmity."
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 7:39-40

   39. The wife is bound by the law as long as her husband liveth; but if
   her husband be dead, she is at liberty to be married to whom she will;
   only in the Lord.

   39. Muller alligata est Legi, quamdiu maritus ejus vivit: si auterm
   dormierit maritus ejus, libera est, ut cui vult nubat, modo in Domino.

   40. But she is happier if she so abide, after my judgment: and I think
   also that I have the Spirit of God.

   40. Beatior vero est, si sic maneat, secundum meam sententiam: existimo
   autem, me quoque Spiritum Dei habere.


   39. The wife is bound He had previously spoken indiscriminately of
   husbands and wives, but as wives, on account of the modesty of their
   sex, might seem to have less liberty, he has thought it necessary to
   give in addition some special directions in reference to them. He now,
   therefore, teaches that women are not less at liberty than men to marry
   a second time, on their becoming widows. [453] We have already
   mentioned above, that those who desired a second marriage were branded
   with the reproach of intemperance, and that, with the view of putting
   some kind of slight upon them, those who had been contented with being
   once married, were wont to be presented with the "chaplet of chastity."
   Nay more, this first opinion had, in course of time, become prevalent
   among Christians; for second marriages had no blessing pronounced upon
   them, and some Councils prohibited the clergy from being present on
   such occasions. The Apostle here condemns tyranny of that sort, and
   declares, that no hindrance ought to be thrown in the way of widows'
   marrying, if they think proper.

   It is of little consequence, and so far as the sense is concerned it
   matters nothing, whether we say that the wife is bound legi, (to the
   law,) in the dative, or lege, (by the law,) in the ablative. For it is
   the law that declares the connection between husband and wife to be
   indissoluble. If, however, you read it in the dative, the term will
   convey the idea of authority or obligation. [454] Now he reasons from
   contraries; for if a woman is bound to her husband for life, she is,
   then, set at liberty by his death. After she has been set at liberty,
   let her be married to whom she will

   When the verb to sleep means to die, [455] it refers not to the soul,
   but to the body, as is manifest from its constant use in Scripture.
   [456] It is a foolish part, therefore, that is acted by certain
   fanatics, who, from this little word, make it their endeavor to prove
   that the souls of men, after being separated from their bodies, are
   destitute of thought and intelligence, or, in other words, of their
   life.

   Only in the Lord This is thought to be added for the purpose of
   admonishing them in passing, that they ought not to yoke themselves
   with the irreligious, or to covet their society. This, I acknowledge,
   is true, but I am of opinion that more is meant that they should do
   this in a religious way, and in the fear of the Lord, [457] for it is
   in this manner that marriages are formed auspiciously.

   40. But she is happier if she so abide Why? Is it because widowhood is
   of itself a virtue? No; but because it will have less to distract, and
   is more exempt from earthly cares. As to what he adds -- according to
   my judgment, he does not mean by this expression that his opinion was
   doubtful; but it is as if he had said that such was his decision as to
   this question; for he immediately adds that he has the Spirit of God,
   which is sufficient to give full and perfect authority. There appears,
   at the same time, to be somewhat of irony when he says I think For as
   the false apostles were ever and anon boasting in high-sounding terms
   of their having the Spirit of God, for the purpose of arrogating to
   themselves authority, and in the meantime endeavored to derogate from
   that of Paul, he says that he thinks that he is not less a partaker of
   the Spirit than they
     __________________________________________________________________

   [453] "Apres auoir perdu lears premiers maris;" -- "After having lost
   their first husbands."

   [454] "Authoritc ou puissance et suiection;" -- "Authority or power and
   subjection."

   [455] "Comme en ce passage;" -- "As in this passage."

   [456] The original expression is ea`n de koimethHu ho aner autos, --
   "If her husband has fallen asleep." The metaphor is not peculiar to the
   Scriptures, but is made use of also by heathen writers, of which we
   have a beautiful instance in Callimachus -- hieron hupnon Koimatai;
   Thneskein me lege tous agathous; He sleeps a sacred sleep -- say not
   that good men die. -- Ed

   [457] "Auce reuerence, sagement, et en la erainte du Seigneur;" --
   "With reverence, wisely, and in the fear of the Lord."
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 8
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 8:1-7

   1. Now as touching things offered unto idols, we know that we all have
   knowledge. Knowledge puffeth up, but charity edifieth.

   1. De iis porro quae idolis immolantur, scimus, quod omnes scientiam
   habemus: scientia inflat, caritas autem aedificat.

   2. And if any man think that he knoweth any thing, he knoweth nothing
   yet as he ought to know.

   2. Si quis autem videtur sibi aliquid scire, nondum quicquam scit,
   qualiter scire oportet.

   3. But if any man love God, the same is known of him.

   3. At si quis diligit Deum, hie cognitus est ab illo.

   4. As concerning therefore the eating of those things that are offered
   in sacrifice unto idols, we know that an idol is nothing in the world,
   and that there is none other God but one.

   4. De esu ergo eorum quae idolis immolantur, novimus, quod idolum nihil
   est in mundo, et quod non est alius Deus nisi unus.

   5. For though there be that are called gods, whether in heaven or in
   earth, (as there be gods many, and lords many,)

   5. Nam etsi sunt qui vocentur dii, sire in coelo sive super terram,
   quemadmodum sunt dii multi et domini multi:

   6. But to us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things,
   and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and
   we by him.

   6. Nobis tamen unus Deus Pater, ex quo omnia, et nos in ipso: et unus
   Dominus Iesus Christus, per quem omnia, et nos per ipsum.

   7. Howbeit there is not in every man that knowledge: for some with
   conscience of the idol unto this hour eat it as a thing offered unto an
   idol; and their conscience being weak is defiled.

   7. At non est in omnibus scientia: quidam autem cum idoli conscientia
   nunc quoque tanquam idolo immolatum edunt, et conscientia eorum,
   infirma quum sit, polluitur.


   He now passes on to another question, which he had merely touched upon
   in the sixth chapter, without fully discussing. For when he had spoken
   of the avarice of the Corinthians, and had drawn that discussion to a
   close with this statement -- Neither covetous, nor extortioners, nor
   fornicators, etc., shall inherit the kingdom of God, he passed on to
   speak of the liberty of Christians -- All things are lawful for me. He
   had taken occasion from this to speak of fornication, and from that, of
   marriage Now, therefore, he at length follows out what he had touched
   upon as to things intermediate -- how we ought to restrain our liberty
   in intermediate things. By intermediate things, I mean those that are
   neither good nor bad in themselves, but indifferent, which God has put
   in our power, but in the use of which we ought to observe moderation,
   that there may be a difference between liberty and licentiousness. In
   the outset, he selects one instance, distinguished above all the
   others, as to which the Corinthians grievously offended -- their having
   been present on occasion of the sacred banquets, which were held by
   idolaters in honor of their gods, and eating indiscriminately of the
   meats that were offered to them. As this gave much occasion of offense,
   the Apostle teaches them that they rashly perverted the liberty granted
   them by the Lord.

   1. Concerning things offered unto idols. He begins with a concession,
   in which he voluntarily grants and allows to them everything that they
   were prepared to demand or object. "I see what your pretext is: you
   make Christian liberty your pretext. You hold out that you have
   knowledge, and that there is not one of you that is so ignorant as not
   to know that there is but one God. I grant all this to be true, but of
   what avail is that knowledge which is ruinous to the brethren?" Thus,
   then, he grants them what they demand, but it is in such a way as to
   show that their excuses are empty and of no avail.

   Knowledge puffeth up He shows, from the effects, how frivolous a thing
   it is to boast of knowledge, when love is wanting. "Of what avail is
   knowledge, that is of such a kind as puffs us up and elates us, while
   it is the part of love to edify?" This passage, which otherwise is
   somewhat obscure, in consequence of its brevity, may easily be
   understood in this way -- "Whatever is devoid of love is of no account
   in the sight of God; nay more, it is displeasing to him, and much more
   so what is openly at variance with love Now that, knowledge of which
   you boast, O ye Corinthians, is altogether opposed to love, for it
   puffs up men with pride, and leads to contempt of the brethren, while
   love is concerned for the welfare of brethren, and exhorts us to edify
   them. Accursed, then, be that knowledge which makes men proud, and is
   not regulated by a desire of edifying."

   Paul, however, did not mean, that this is to be reckoned as a fault
   attributable to learning -- that those who are learned are often
   self-complacent, and have admiration of themselves, accompanied with
   contempt of others. Nor did he understand this to be the natural
   tendency of learning -- to produce arrogance, but simply meant to show
   what effect knowledge has in an individual, that has not the fear of
   God, and love of the brethren; for the wicked abuse all the gifts of
   God, so as to exalt themselves. Thus riches, honors, dignities,
   nobility, beauty, and other things of that nature, puff up; because
   men, elated through a mistaken confidence in these things, very
   frequently become insolent. [458] Nor is it always so; for we see that
   many who are rich and beautiful, and abounding in honors, and
   distinguished for dignity and nobility, are, nevertheless, of a modest
   disposition, and not at all tainted with pride. And even when it does
   happen to be so, it is, nevertheless, not proper that we should put the
   blame upon what we know to be gifts of God; for in the first place that
   were unfair and unreasonable; and farther, by putting the blame upon
   things that are not blameworthy, we would exempt the persons themselves
   from blame, who alone are in fault. My meaning is this -- "If riches
   naturally tend to make men proud, then a rich man, if proud, is free
   from blame, for the evil arises from riches."

   We must, therefore, lay it down as a settled principle, that knowledge
   is good in itself; but as piety is its only foundation, [459] it
   becomes empty and useless in wicked men: as love is its true seasoning,
   where that is wanting it is tasteless. And truly, where there is not
   that thorough knowledge of God which humbles us, and teaches us to do
   good to the brethren, it is not so much knowledge, as an empty notion
   of it, even in those that are reckoned the most learned. At the same
   time, knowledge is not by any means to be blamed for this, any more
   than a sword, if it falls into the hands of a madman. Let this be
   considered as said [460] with a view to certain fanatics, who furiously
   declaim against all the liberal arts and sciences, as if their only use
   were to puff men up, and were not of the greatest advantage as helps in
   common life. [461] Now those very persons, who defame them in this
   style, are ready to burst with pride, to such an extent as to verify
   the old proverb -- "Nothing is so arrogant as ignorance."

   2. And if any man thinketh That man thinketh that he knoweth something,
   who is delighted with the opinion that he entertains of his own
   knowledge, and despises others, as if he were far above them. For Paul
   does not here condemn knowledge, but that ambition and haughtiness
   which ungodly men contract in consequence of it. Otherwise he does not
   exhort us to be sceptical, so as to be always hesitating and hanging in
   doubt, and he does not approve of a false and counterfeit modesty, as
   if it were a good thing to think that we are ignorant of what we do
   know. That man, therefore, who thinketh that he knoweth something, or,
   in other words, who is insolent from an empty notion of his own
   knowledge, so that he prefers himself before others, and is
   self-conceited, he knoweth nothing yet as he ought to know For the
   beginning of all true knowledge is acquaintance with God, which
   produces in us humility and submission; nay more, it prostrates us
   entirely instead of elating us. But where pride is, there is ignorance
   of God [462] -- a beautiful passage! Would to God that all knew it
   aright, so as properly to understand the rule of right knowledge!

   3. But if any man loves God Here we have the conclusion, in which he
   shows what is especially commendable in Christians, and even renders
   knowledge, and all other endowments worthy of commendation, if we love
   God; for if it is so, we will also love our neighbors in him. By this
   means all our actions will be properly regulated, and consequently
   approved by God. He shows, therefore, from consequences, that no
   learning is commendable that is not dipped in the love of God; because
   that alone secures, that whatever endowments we have are approved by
   him, as it is said in the second Epistle --

   If any man be in Christ he is a new creature.
   (2 Corinthians 5:17.)

   By this he intimates, that without the Spirit of regeneration, all
   things else, whatever they may have of show, are of no value. To be
   known by God means to be held in any estimation, or to be reckoned
   among his sons. Thus he erases all proud persons from the book of life,
   (Philippians 4:3,) and from the roll of the pious.

   4. Concerning, therefore, the eating of those things He now returns to
   the statement with which he had set out, and speaks more plainly in
   reference to the pretext made use of by the Corinthians. For as the
   whole of the evil took its rise from this root -- that they were
   pleased with themselves, and despised others, he condemns, in general,
   that contemptuous knowledge which is not seasoned with love. Now,
   however, he explains particularly, what is the kind of knowledge on
   which they valued themselves -- that an idol is an empty figment of the
   human brain, and must therefore be reckoned as nothing; and
   accordingly, that the consecration, that is gone through in name of the
   idol, is a foolish imagination, and of no importance, and that a
   Christian man, therefore, is not polluted, who, without reverence for
   the idol, eats of things offered to idols. This is the sum of the
   excuse, and it is not set aside by Paul as false, (for it contains
   excellent doctrine,) but because they abused it, in opposition to love

   As to the words, Erasmus reads thus -- "An idol has no existence." I
   prefer the rendering of the old translation -- An idol is nothing. For
   the argument is this -- that an idol is nothing, inasmuch as there is
   but one God; for it follows admirably -- "If there is no other God
   besides our God, then an idol is an empty dream, and mere vanity." When
   he says -- and there is none other God but one, I understand the
   conjunction and as meaning because. For the reason why an idol is
   nothing is, that it must be estimated according to the thing that it
   represents. Now it is appointed for the purpose of representing God:
   nay more, for the purpose of representing false gods, inasmuch as there
   is but one God, who is invisible and incomprehensible. The reason, too,
   must be carefully observed -- An idol is nothing because there is no
   God but one; for he is the invisible God, and cannot be represented by
   a visible sign, so as to be worshipped through means of it. Whether,
   therefore, idols are erected to represent the true God, or false gods,
   it is in all cases a perverse contrivance. Hence Habakkuk calls idols
   teachers of lies, (Habakkuk 2:18,) because they deal falsely in
   pretending to give a figure or image of God, and deceive men under a
   false title. Hence ouden (nothing) refers not to essence, but to
   quality -- for an idol is made of some substance -- either silver, or
   wood, or stone; but as God does not choose to be represented in this
   way, it is vanity and nothing as to meaning and use.

   5. For though there be that are called "They have," says he, "the name,
   but the reality is wanting." He uses the word called here, to mean --
   renowned in the estimation of men He has also made use of a general
   division, when he says in heaven or on earth The gods that are made
   mention of as being in heaven, are the heavenly hosts, as the Scripture
   terms the sun, moon, and the other stars. How very far they are,
   however, from being entitled to divine honors, Moses shows from this,
   that they were created for our use. The sun is our servant; the moon is
   our handmaid. How absurd, therefore, it is to render to them divine
   honors! By the gods that are on earth, are properly meant, in my
   opinion, men and women for whom religious worship has been appointed.
   [463] For, as Pliny observes, those who had deserved well of mankind
   had their memory consecrated by religion, so as to be worshipped as
   deities -- Jupiter, Mars, Saturn, Mercury, and Apollo, who were mortal
   men, but were, after death, exalted to the rank of deities; and, more
   recently, Hercules, Romulus, and at length the Caesars -- as if it were
   in the power of mankind to make deities at their pleasure, while they
   cannot give to themselves either life or immortality. There are also
   other gods that are terrestrial, taken either from cattle or from brute
   creatures, as, for example, among the Egyptians, the ox, the serpent,
   the cat, the onion, the garlic; and, among the Romans, the
   boundary-stone, [464] and the stone Vesta. They are gods, then, only in
   name; but Paul says that he does not stop to notice deifications of
   this sort. [465]

   6. But to us there is but one God, the Father Though Paul says these
   things by anticipation, he repeats the excuse made by the Corinthians,
   in such a way as at the same time to convey instruction. For, from what
   is more especially peculiar to God, he proves that there is but one
   God: "Whatever has its origin from what is foreign to itself, is not
   eternal, and, consequently, is not God. All things have their origin
   from one Being: he alone, therefore, is God." Again -- "He is assuredly
   God who gives existence to all, and from whom all things flow, as from
   the supreme source; but there is only One, from whom all things flow,
   and hence there is but one God." When he adds -- and we in him, (eis
   auton,) he means, that we subsist in God, as it was by him that we were
   once created. For this clause might, indeed, seem to have another
   signification -- that as we have our beginning from him, so we ought to
   devote our life to him as its end; and it is used in this sense in
   Romans 11:39. Here, however, it is taken for en auto, which is commonly
   made use of by the Apostles. His meaning, therefore, is, that as we
   were once created by God, so it is by his power that we are preserved
   in our present condition. That this is its meaning, is evident from
   what he affirms respecting Christ immediately afterwards -- that we are
   by him For he designed to ascribe the same operation to the Father and
   to the Son, adding, however, the distinction which was suitable to the
   Persons. He says, then, that we subsist in the Father, and that it is
   by the Son, because the Father is indeed the foundation of all
   existence; but, as it is by the Son that we are united to him, so he
   communicates to us through him the reality of existence.

   One Lord These things are affirmed respecting Christ relatively, that
   is, in relationship to the Father. For all things that are God's are
   assuredly applicable to Christ, when no mention is made of persons; but
   as the person of the Father is here brought into comparison with the
   person of the Son, it is with good reason that the Apostle
   distinguishes what is peculiar to them.

   Now the Son of God, after having been manifested in the flesh, received
   from the Father dominion and power over all things, that he might reign
   alone in heaven and on earth, and that the Father might exercise his
   authority through his hands. For this reason our Lord is spoken of as
   one. [466] But in respect of dominion being ascribed to him alone, this
   is not to be taken as meaning that worldly distinctions [467] are
   abolished. For Paul speaks here of spiritual dominion, while the
   governments of the world are political; as when he said a little before
   -- there are many that are called lords -- (1 Corinthians 8:5) -- he
   meant that, not of kings, or of others who excel in rank and dignity,
   but of idols or demons, to whom foolish men ascribe superiority and
   rule. While, therefore, our religion acknowledges but one Lord, this is
   no hindrance in the way of civil governments having many lords, to whom
   honor and respect are due in that one Lord

   7. But there is not in all that knowledge. He refutes, in a single
   word, all that he had previously brought forward in their name, showing
   that it is not enough that they know that what, they do is right, if
   they have not at the same time a regard to their brethren. When he said
   above -- We know that we all have knowledge, (1 Corinthians 8:1,) he
   referred to those whom he reproved for abusing their liberty. Now, on
   the other hand, he calls them to consider, that there are many weak and
   ignorant persons associated with them, to whom they ought to
   accommodate themselves. "You have, it is true, a correct judgment in
   the sight of God, and if you were alone in the world, it would be as
   lawful for you to eat of things offered to idols, as of any other kinds
   of food. But consider your brethren, to whom you are debtors. You have
   knowledge; they are ignorant,. Your actions ought to be regulated not
   merely according to your knowledge, but also according to their
   ignorance." This reply is particularly deserving of notice; for there
   is nothing to which we are more prone [468] than this, that every one
   follows his own advantage, to the neglect of that of others. Hence we
   feel prepared to rest in our own judgment, and do not consider, that
   the propriety of those works that we do in the sight of men depends not
   merely on our own conscience, but also on that of our brethren.

   Some with conscience of the idol This is their ignorance, that they
   were still under the influence of some superstitious notion, as if
   there were some virtue in the idol, or some virtue in a wicked and
   idolatrous consecration. Paul, however, does not speak of idolaters,
   who were entire strangers to pure religion, but of ignorant persons who
   had not been sufficiently instructed, to understand that an idol is
   nothing, and therefore that the consecration, which was gone through in
   name of the idol, is of no importance. Their idea, therefore, was this:
   "As an idol is something, the consecration which is gone through in its
   name is not altogether vain, and hence those meats are not pure, that
   have been once dedicated to idols." Hence they thought, that, if they
   ate of them, they contracted some degree of pollution, and were, in a
   manner, partakers with the idol. This is the kind of offense that Paul
   reproves in the Corinthians -- when we induce weak brethren, by our
   example, to venture upon anything against their conscience.

   And their conscience God would have us try or attempt nothing but what
   we know for certain is agreeable to him. Whatever, therefore, is done
   with a doubting conscience, is, in consequence of doubts of that kind,
   faulty in the sight of God. And this is what he says, (Romans 14:23,)
   Whatsoever is not of faith is sin Hence the truth of the common saying,
   that "those build for hell, who build against their conscience." For as
   the excellence of actions depends on the fear of God and integrity of
   conscience, so, on the other hand, there is no action, that is so good
   in appearance, as not to be polluted by a corrupt affection of the
   mind. For the man, who ventures upon anything in opposition to
   conscience, does thereby discover some contempt of God; for it is a
   token that we fear God, when we have respect to his will in all things.
   Hence you are not without contempt of God, if you so much as move a
   finger while uncertain, whether it may not be displeasing to him. As to
   meats, there is another thing to be considered, for they are not
   sanctified to us otherwise than by the word (1 Timothy 4:5.) If that
   word is wanting, there remains nothing but pollution -- not that the
   creatures of God are polluted, but because man's use of them is impure.
   In fine, as men's hearts are purified by faith, so without faith there
   is nothing that is pure in the sight of God.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [458] "Et intraittables;" -- "And insufferable."

   [459] "La crainte de Dieu est le seul et vray fondement d'icelle;" --
   "The fear of God is its only true foundation."

   [460] "J'ai bien voulu dire ceci;" -- "I have felt prepared to say
   this."

   [461] "Moyens et instrumens tres-vtiles, tant a la cognoissance de
   Dieu, qu'a la conduite de la vie commune;" -- "Most useful means and
   instruments, both for the knowledge of God, and for the conduct of
   common life."

   [462] "La regne ignorance et faute de cognoissance de Dieu;" -- "There
   ignorance reigns, and deficiency in acquaintance with God."

   [463] "Ausquels on a attribue diuinite, et en leur honneur dresse
   quelque senrice diuin;" -- "To whom they have ascribed divinity, and
   have appointed some divine service in honor of them."

   [464] The allusion is to Terminus, the god of boundaries, of whom
   mention is made by Livy (1. 10, and 5. 54.) -- Ed.

   [465] "Telles consecrations faites a l'appetit des hommes;" -- "Such
   consecrations made according to the humor of men."

   [466] "Pour ceste raison quand il est parle de nostre Seigneur, il est
   dit que nous n'en auons qu'vn, assauoir Christ;" -- "For this reason,
   when mention is made of our Lord, it is declared that we have only one,
   namely, Christ."

   [467] "Les degrez, estats, et gouuernemens du monde;" -- "Ranks,
   conditions, and governments of the world."

   [468] "Il n'y a rien plus commun et ordinaire que ce vice;" -- "There
   is nothing that is more common and ordinary than this fault."
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 8:8-13

   8. But meat commendeth us not to God: for neither, if we eat, are we
   the better; neither, if we eat not, are we the worse.

   8. Atqui esca nos non commendat Deo: neque si comedamus, abundamus,
   neque si non comedamus, deficimur aliquo.

   9. But take heed lest by any means this liberty of yours become a
   stumblingblock to them that are weak.

   9. Sed videte, ne quo modo facultas haec vestra offendiculo sit
   infirmis.

   10. For if any man see thee which hast knowledge sit at meat in the
   idol's temple, shall not the conscience of him which is weak be
   emboldened to eat those things which are offered to idols;

   10. Si quis enim videat to, utcunque scientiam habeas, in epulo
   simulacrorum accumbentem; nonne conscientia eius, quum tamen infirmus
   sit, aedificabitur ad edendum quae sunt idolis immolata?

   11. And through thy knowledge shall the weak brother perish, for whom
   Christ died?

   11. Et peribit frater, qui infirmus est, in tua scientia, propter quem
   Christus mortuus est?

   12. But when ye sin so against the brethren, and wound their weak
   conscience, ye sin against Christ.

   12. Sic autem peccantes in fratres, et vuluerantes conscientiam illorum
   infirmam, in Christum peccatis.

   13. Wherefore, if meat make my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh
   while the world standeth, lest I make my brother to offend.

   13. Quapropter si esca offendit fratrem meum, nequaquam vescar carnibus
   in aeternum, ne fratri meo sim offendiculo.


   8. Meat recommendeth us not to God This was, or may have been, another
   pretext made use of by the Corinthians -- that the worship of God does
   not consist in meats, as Paul himself teaches in his Epistle to the
   Romans, (Romans 14:17,) that the kingdom of God is not meat or drink
   Paul answers: "We must at the same time take care that our liberty does
   not do injury to our neighbors." In this he tacitly acknowledges, that
   in the sight of God it matters not what kinds of food we partake of,
   because he allows us the free use of them, so far as conscience is
   concerned; but that this liberty, as to the external use of it, is made
   subject to love. The argument of the Corinthians, therefore, was
   defective, inasmuch as they inferred the whole from a part, for in the
   use of them a regard to the claims of love is included. It is,
   therefore, certain, that meat recommendeth us not to God; and Paul
   acknowledges this, but he states this exception, that love is
   recommended to us by God, which it were criminal to overlook.

   Neither if we eat, are we the better. He does not speak of improvement
   as to the stomach; for the man who has dined has a better filled
   stomach than the man who goes fasting; but he means, that we have
   neither more nor less of righteousness from eating or from abstaining.
   Besides, he does not speak of every kind of abstinence, or of every
   kind of eating. For excess and luxury are in themselves displeasing to
   God, while sobriety and moderation are well-pleasing to him. But let it
   be understood by us, that the kingdom of God, which is spiritual, does
   not consist in these outward observances, and therefore, that things
   indifferent are in themselves of no importance in the sight of God.
   While he brings this forward in the person of others by anthypophora,
   [469] he at the same time admits that it is true, for it is taken from
   his own doctrine, which we touched upon a little ago.

   9. Take heed that your liberty He leaves their liberty untouched, but
   moderates the use of it thus far -- that it may not give occasion of
   stumbling to the weak. And he expressly desires that regard be had to
   the weak, that is, to those who are not, yet thoroughly confirmed in
   the doctrine of piety, for as they are wont to be regarded with
   contempt, it is the will and command of the Lord, that regard should be
   had to them. In the meantime, he hints that strong giants, who may be
   desirous tyrannically to subject our liberty to their humor, may safely
   be let alone, [470] because we need not fear giving offense to those
   who are not drawn into sin through infirmity, but eagerly catch at
   something to find fault with. What he means by an occasion, of
   stumbling we shall see herelong.

   10. If any one see thee. From this it appears more clearly, how much
   liberty the Corinthians allowed themselves; for when the wicked made a
   kind of sacred banquet for their idols, they did not hesitate [471] to
   go to it, to eat of the sacrifice along with them. Paul now shows what
   evil resulted from this. In the first clause, instead of the words who
   hast knowledge, I have rendered the expression thus -- though thou
   shouldest have; and in the second clause, in the expression who is
   weak, I have introduced the word notwithstanding. This I found it
   necessary to do for the clearing up of Paul's meaning. For he makes a
   concession, as if he had said: "Be it so, that thou hast knowledge; he
   who seeth thee, though he is not endowed with knowledge, is
   notwithstanding confirmed by thine example to venture upon the same
   thing, while he would never have taken such a step if he had not had
   one to take the lead. Now when he has one to imitate, he thinks that he
   has a sufficient excuse in the circumstance that he is imitating
   another, while in the meantime he is acting from an evil conscience."
   For weakness here means ignorance, or scruple of conscience. I am
   aware, at the same time, in what way others explain it; for they
   understand the occasion of stumbling to be this -- when ignorant
   persons, induced by example, imagine that in this way they perform some
   kind of religious service to God, but this idea is quite foreign to
   Paul's meaning. For he reproves them, as I have said, [472] because
   they emboldened the ignorant to hurry on, contrary to conscience, to
   attempt what they did not think it lawful for them to do. To be built
   up means here -- to be confirmed [473] Now that is a ruinous kind of
   building, that is not founded on sound doctrine.

   11. And thy brother perish Mark how serious an evil it is, that mankind
   commonly think so little of -- that of venturing upon anything with a
   doubtful or opposing conscience. For the object to which our whole life
   ought to be directed, is the will of the Lord. This, therefore, is the
   one thing that vitiates all our actions, when we disregard it. [474]
   This we do, not merely by an outward action, but even by a thought of
   the mind, when we allow ourselves in anything in opposition to
   conscience, even though the thing be not evil in itself. Let us bear in
   mind, therefore, that whenever we take a step in opposition to
   conscience, we are on the high road to ruin.

   I read, however, the sentence interrogatively, thus: Shall he perish
   through thy knowledge? as though he had said: "Is it reasonable that
   thy knowledge should give occasion of ruin to thy brother? Is it for
   this reason that thou knowest what is right, that thou mayest cause
   another's ruin!" He makes use of the term brother, in order to expose
   their pride as unfeeling, in this way: "It is true that the person whom
   you despise is weak, but still he is your brother, for God has adopted
   him. You act a cruel part, therefore, in having no concern for your
   brother." There is, however, still greater force in what follows --
   that even those that are ignorant or weak have been redeemed with the
   blood of Christ; for nothing were more unseemly than this, that while
   Christ did not hesitate to die, in order that the weak might not
   perish, we, on the other hand, reckon as nothing the salvation of those
   who have been redeemed with so great a price. A memorable saying, by
   which we are taught how precious the salvation of our brethren ought to
   be in our esteem, and not merely that of all, but of each individual in
   particular, inasmuch as the blood of Christ was poured out for each
   individual!

   12. When ye sin so against the brethren, etc. For if the soul of every
   one that is weak is the price of Christ's blood, that man who, for the
   sake of a very small portion of meat, hurries back again to death the
   brother who has been redeemed by Christ, shows how contemptible the
   blood of Christ is in his view. Hence contempt of this kind is an open
   insult to Christ. In what way a weak conscience may be wounded has been
   already explained -- when it is built up in what is evil (1 Corinthians
   8:10) so as daringly and rashly to rush on farther than the individual
   thinks to be lawful for him.

   13. Wherefore if meat make my brother to offend With the view of
   reproving more severely their disdainful liberty, he declares, that we
   ought not merely to refrain from a single banquet rather than injure a
   brother, but ought to give up the eating of meats during our whole
   life. Nor does he merely prescribe what ought to be done, but declares
   that he would himself act in this way. The expression, it is true, is
   hyperbolical, as it is scarcely possible that one should refrain from
   eating flesh during his whole life, if he remain in common life; [475]
   but his meaning is, that he would rather make no use of his liberty in
   any instance, than be an occasion of offense to the weak. For
   participation is in no case lawful, unless it be regulated by the rule
   of love. Would that this were duly pondered by those who make
   everything subservient to their own advantage, so that they cannot
   endure to give up so much as a hair's-breadth of their own right for
   the sake of their brethren; and that they would attend not merely to
   what Paul teaches, but also to what he marks out by his own example!
   How greatly superior he is to us! When he, then, makes no hesitation in
   subjecting himself thus far to his brethren, which of us would not
   submit to the same condition?

   But, however difficult it is to act up to this doctrine, so far as the
   meaning is concerned, is easy, were it not that some have corrupted it
   by foolish glosses, and others by wicked calumnies. Both classes err as
   to the meaning of the word offend For they understand the word offend
   to mean, incurring the hatred or displeasure of men, or what is nearly
   the same thing, doing what displeases them, or is not altogether
   agreeable to them But it appears very manifestly from the context, that
   it means simply to hinder a brother by bad example (as an obstacle
   thrown in his way) from the right course, or to give him occasion of
   falling. Paul, therefore, is not here treating of the retaining of the
   favor of men, but of the assisting of the weak, so as to prevent their
   falling, and prudently directing them, that they may not turn aside
   from the right path. But (as I have said) the former class are foolish,
   while the latter are also wicked and impudent.

   Those are foolish, who allow Christians scarcely any use of things
   indifferent, lest they should offend superstitious persons. "Paul," say
   they, "prohibits here everything that may give occasion of offense Now
   to eat flesh on Friday will not fail to give offense, and hence we must
   abstain from it, not merely when there are some weak persons present,
   but in every case without exception, for it is possible that they may
   come to know of it." Not to speak of their misinterpretation of the
   word rendered occasion of offense, they fall into a grievous blunder in
   not considering that Paul here inveighs against those who impudently
   abuse their knowledge in the presence of the weak, whom they take no
   pains to instruct.

   Hence there will be no occasion for reproof, if instruction has been
   previously given. Farther, Paul does not command us to calculate,
   whether there may be an occasion of offense in what we do, except when
   the danger is present to our view.

   I come now to the other class. These are pretended followers of
   Nicodemus, [476] who under this pretext conform themselves to the
   wicked by participating in their idolatry, and not contented with
   justifying what they do amiss, are desirous also to bind others to the
   same necessity. Nothing could be said with greater plainness to condemn
   their perverse dissimulation than what Paul here teaches -- that all
   who by their example allure the weak to idolatry, commit a grievous
   outrage against God as well as men. Yet they eagerly shield themselves
   from this by endeavoring to show that superstitions ought to be
   cherished in the hearts of the ignorant, and that we ought to lead the
   way before them to idolatry, lest a free condemnation of idolatry
   should offend them. Hence I will not do them the honor of dwelling upon
   a refutation of their impudence. I simply admonish my readers to
   compare Paul's times with ours, and judge from this whether it is
   allowable to be present at mass, and other abominations, giving so much
   occasion of offense to the weak
     __________________________________________________________________

   [469] "Par une maniere d'anticipation;" -- "By way of anticipation."
   Anthrypophora is a figure of speech which derives its name from the
   Greek term anthupophora, a reply to an objection It is used in this
   sense by Dionysius Halicarnassensis. -- Ed

   [470] "Nous ne nous en devons point soucier, mais les laisser la;" --
   "We should not concern ourselves as to them, but leave them there."

   [471] "Les Corinthiens n'auoyent point de honte;" -- "The Corinthians
   were not ashamed."

   [472] See [12]commentary on 1 Corinthians 8:7.

   [473] The original word oikodomethesetai, shall be built up, is used
   here, in the opinion of some learned critics, to mean encouraged or
   emboldened, and a parallel passage is pointed to in Malachi 3:15, where
   the Hebrew word kvky is rendered in the Septuagint anoikodomountai or
   emboldened It deserves notice, however, that the Apostle had in the
   commencement of the chapter spoken of love as edifying, while knowledge
   puffeth up, and it is not improbable that he made use of the same word
   here ironically, as we would say -- "Will not this be edifying the
   wrong way?" -- Ed

   [474] "Quand nous entreprenons quelque chose center ceste saincte
   volonte;" -- "When we attempt anything in opposition to that holy
   will."

   [475] "S'il demelure en la conuersation et communication auec les
   autres?" -- "If he remains in converse and fellowship with others."

   [476] Our author speaks of the same class of persons when commenting on
   John 7:50. See Calvin's Commentary on John, [13]vol. 1, p. 317. -- Ed.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 9
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 9:1-12

   1. Am I not an apostle? am I not free? have I not seen Jesus Christ our
   Lord? are not ye my work in the Lord?

   1. Non sum liber? non sum Apostolus? [477] nonne Iesum Christum Dominum
   nostrum vidi? nonne opus meum vos estis in Domino?

   2. If I be not an an apostle unto others, yet doubtless I am to you:
   for the seal of mine apostleship are ye in the Lord.

   2. Si aliis non sum Apostolus, vobis tamen sum: sigillum enim
   Apostolatus mei vos estis in Domino?

   3. Mine answer to them that do examine me is this,

   3. Haec mea defensio est apudeos, qui in me inquirunt.

   4. Have we not power to eat and to drink?

   4. Numquid non habemus potestatem edendi et bibendi?

   5. Have we not power to lead about a sister, a wife, as well as other
   apostles, and as the brethren of the Lord, and Cephas?

   5. Numquid potestatem non habemus circumducendae uxoris sororis,
   quemadmodum et reliqui Apostoli, et fratres Domini, et Cephas?

   6. Or I only and Barnabas, have not we power to forbear working?

   6. An ego solus et Barnabas non habemus potestatem hoc agendi? [478]

   7. Who goeth a warfare any time own charges? who planteth a vineyard,
   and eateth not of the fruit thereof? or who feedeth a flock, and eateth
   not of the milk of the flock?

   7. Quis militavit suo sumptu unquam? quis plantat vitem, et ex fructu
   ejus non comedit? quis pascit gregem, et lacte gregis non vescitur?

   8. Say I these things as a man? Or saith not the law the same also?

   8. Num secundum hominem haec dico?

   9. For it is written in the law of Moses, Thou shalt not muzzle the
   mouth of the ox that treadeth out the corn. Doth God take care for
   oxen?

   9. Numquid lex quoque eadem non dicit? in lege enim Mosis (Deuteronomy
   25:4) scripture est: non obligabis os bovi trituranti: numquid boves
   curae sunt Deo,

   10. Or saith he it altogether for our sakes? For our sakes, no doubt,
   this is written: that he that ploweth should plow in hope; and that he
   that thrasheth in hope should be partaker of his hope.

   10. Vel propter nos omnino dicit? Et sane propter nos scripturm est:
   quoniam debet sub spe, qui arat, arare, et qui triturat, sub spe
   participandi. (Alias: quia debeat sub spe qui arat, arare, et qui
   triturat sub spe, spei suae particeps esse debeat.)

   11. If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if
   we shall reap your carnal things?

   11. Si nos vobis spiritualia seminavimus, magnum, si carnalia vestra
   metamus?

   12. If others be partakers of this power over you, are not we rather?
   Nevertheless we have not used this power; but suffer all things, lest
   we should hinder the gospel of Christ.

   12. Si alii hanc in vos sumunt potestatem, an non magis nos? atqui non
   usi sumus facultate hac: sed omnia sufferimus, ut ne quam offensionem
   demus Evangelio Christi.


   1. Am I not free? He confirms by facts what he had stated immediately
   before, -- that he would rather never taste of flesh during his whole
   life, than give occasion of stumbling to a brother, and, at the same
   time, he shows that he requires nothing more from them than what he had
   himself practiced. And, assuredly, natural equity requires that
   whatever law is imposed by any one upon others, should be submitted to
   by himself. More especially a Christian teacher should impose upon
   himself this necessity, that he may have it always in his power to
   confirm his doctrine by an exemplary life. We know by experience, that
   it is a very unpleasant thing that Paul required from the Corinthians
   -- to refrain, for the sake of their brethren, from making use of the
   liberty that was allowed them. He could scarcely have demanded this, if
   he had not taken the lead and shown them the way. And he had, it is
   true, promised that he would do this, but, as he might not be believed
   by all on his simply promising for the future, he makes mention of what
   he had already done. He brings forward a remarkable instance, in
   respect of his having denied himself the liberty which he might
   otherwise have used, purely in order that he might give the false
   Apostles no occasion for calumniating. He had preferred to earn his
   food with his own hands, rather than be supported at the expense of the
   Corinthians, to whom he administered the Gospel.

   He treats, however, at great length of the right of the Apostles to
   receive food and clothing. This he does, partly for the purpose of
   stirring them up the more to forego many things for the sake of their
   brethren after his example, because they were unduly tenacious in the
   retaining of their own rights, and partly for the purpose of exposing
   more fully in view the unreasonableness of calumniators, who took
   occasion for reviling from what was anything but blameworthy. He
   speaks, also, interrogatively, in order to press the matter home more
   closely. The question -- Am I not free? is of a general nature. When he
   adds -- Am I not an Apostle? he specifies a particular kind of liberty.
   "If I am an Apostle of Christ, why should my condition be worse than
   that of others?" Hence he proves his liberty on the ground of his being
   an Apostle.

   Have I not seen Jesus Christ? He expressly adds this, in order that he
   may not be reckoned inferior in any respect, to the other Apostles, for
   this one thing the malevolent and envious bawled out on all occasions
   -- that he had received from the hands of men whatever he had of the
   gospel, inasmuch as he had never seen Christ. And, certainly, he had
   not had converse with Christ while he was in the world, but Christ had
   appeared to him after his resurrection. It was not a smaller privilege,
   however, to have seen Christ in his immortal glory, than to have seen
   him in the abasement of mortal flesh. He makes mention, also,
   afterwards of this vision, (1 Corinthians 15:8,) and mention is made of
   it twice in the Acts, (Acts 9:3, and Acts 22:6.) Hence this passage
   tends to establish his call, because, although he had not been set
   apart as one of the twelve, there was no less authority in the
   appointment which Christ published from heaven.

   Are not ye my work? He now, in the second place, establishes his
   Apostleship from the effect of it, because he had gained over the
   Corinthians to the Lord by the gospel. Now this is a great thing that
   Paul claims for himself, when he calls their conversion his work, for
   it is in a manner a new creation of the soul. But how will this
   correspond with what we had above -- that

   he that planteth is nothing, and he that watereth is nothing?
   (1 Corinthians 3:7.)

   I answer, that as God is the efficient cause, while man, with his
   preaching, is an instrument that can do nothing of itself, we must
   always speak of the efficacy of the ministry in such a manner that the
   entire praise of the work may be reserved for God alone. But in some
   cases, when the ministry is spoken of, man is compared with God, and
   then that statement holds good -- He that planteth is nothing, and he
   that watereth is nothing; for what can be left to a man if he is
   brought into competition with God? Hence Scripture represents ministers
   as nothing in comparison with God; but when the ministry is simply
   treated of without any comparison with God, then, as in this passage,
   its efficacy is honorably made mention of, with signal encomiums. For,
   in that case, the question is not, what man can do of himself without
   God, but, on the contrary, God himself, who is the author, is conjoined
   with the instrument, and the Spirit's influence with man's labor. In
   other words, the question is not, what man himself accomplishes by his
   own power, but what God effects through his hands.

   2. If I am not an Apostle to others The sum of this tends to the
   establishing of his authority among the Corinthians, so as to place it
   beyond all dispute. "If there are those," says he, "who have doubts as
   to my Apostleship, to you, at least, it ought to be beyond all doubt,
   for, as I planted your Church by my ministry, you are either not
   believers, or you must necessarily recognize me as an Apostle. And that
   he may not seem to rest in mere words, he states that the reality
   itself was to be seen, [479] because God had sealed his Apostleship by
   the faith of the Corinthians. Should any one, however, object, that
   this suits the false Apostles too, who gather disciples to themselves,
   I answer, that pure doctrine is above all things required, in order
   that any one may have a confirmation of his ministry in the sight of
   God from its effect. There is nothing, therefore, here to furnish
   impostors with matter of congratulation, if they have deceived any of
   the populace, nay, even nations and kingdoms, by their falsehoods.
   Although in some cases persons are the occasion of spreading the
   kingdom of Christ, who, nevertheless, do not preach the gospel
   sincerely, as is said in Philippians 1:16, it is not without good
   reason that Paul infers from the fruit of his labor, that he is
   divinely commissioned: for the structure of the Corinthian Church was
   such, that the blessing of God could easily be seen shining forth in
   it, which ought to have served as a confirmation of Paul's office.

   3. My defense. Apart from the principal matter that he has at present
   in hand, it appears also to have been his intention to beat down, in
   passing, the calumnies of those who clamored against his call, as if he
   had been one of the ordinary class of ministers. "I am accustomed,"
   says he, "to put you forward as my shield, in the event of any one
   detracting from the honor of my Apostleship." Hence it follows, that
   the Corinthians are injurious and inimical to themselves, if they do
   not acknowledge him as such, for if their faith was a solemn
   attestation of Paul's Apostleship, and his defense, against slanderers,
   the one could not be invalidated without the other falling along with
   it.

   Where others read -- those who interrogate me, I have rendered it --
   those that examine me -- for he refers to those who raised a dispute as
   to his Apostleship. [480] Latin writers, I confess, speak of a criminal
   being interrogated [481] according to the laws, but the meaning of the
   word anakrinein which Paul makes use of, seemed to me to be brought out
   better in this way.

   4. Have we not power? He concludes from what has been already said,
   that he had a right to receive food and clothing from them, [482] for
   Paul ate and drank, but not at the expense of the Church. This, then,
   was one liberty that he dispensed with. The other was, that he had not
   a wife -- to be maintained, also, at the public expense. Eusebius
   infers from these words that Paul was married, but had left his wife
   somewhere, that she might not be a burden to the Churches, but there is
   no foundation for this, for he might bring forward this, even though
   unmarried. In honoring a Christian wife with the name of sister, he
   intimates, first of all, by this, how firm and lovely ought to be the
   connection between a pious pair, being held by a double tie. Farther he
   hints at the same time what modesty and honorable conduct ought to
   subsist between them. Hence, too, we may infer, how very far marriage
   is from being unsuitable to the ministers of the Church. I pass over
   the fact, that the Apostles made use of it, as to whose example we
   shall have occasion to speak ere long, but Paul here teaches, in
   general terms, what is allowable for all.

   5. Even as the other Apostles. In addition to the Lord's permission, he
   mentions the common practice of others. And with the view of bringing
   out more fully the waiving of his right, he proceeds step by step. In
   the first place, he brings forward the Apostles He then adds, "Nay,
   even the brethren of the Lord themselves also make use of it without
   hesitation -- nay more, Peter himself, to whom the first place is
   assigned by consent of all, allows himself the same liberty." By the
   brethren of the Lord, he means John and James, who were accounted
   pillars, as he states elsewhere. (Galatians 2:9.) And, agreeably to
   what is customary in Scripture, he gives the name of brethren to those
   who were connected with Him by relationship.

   Now, if any one should think to establish Popery from this, he would
   act a ridiculous part. We confess that Peter was acknowledged as first
   among the Apostles, as it is necessary that in every society there
   should always be some one to preside over the others, and they were of
   their own accord prepared to respect Peter for the eminent endowments
   by which he was distinguished, as it is proper to esteem and honor all
   that excel in the gifts of God's grace. That preeminence, however, was
   not lordship -- nay more, it had nothing resembling lordship. For while
   he was eminent among the others, still he was subject to them as his
   colleagues. Farther, it is one thing to have pre-eminence in one
   Church, and quite another, to claim for one's self a kingdom or
   dominion over the whole world. But indeed, even though we should
   concede everything as to Peter, what has this to do with the Pope? For
   as Matthias succeeded Judas, (Acts 1:26,) so some Judas might succeed
   Peter. Nay more, we see that during a period of more than nine hundred
   years among his successors, or at least among those who boast that they
   are his successors, there has not been one who was one whit better than
   Judas. This, however, is not the place to treat of these points.
   Consult my Institutes. (Volume 3.)

   One thing farther must here be noticed, that the Apostles had no horror
   of marriage, which the Papal clergy so much abominate, as unbecoming
   the sanctity of their order. But it was after their time that that
   admirable discovery was made, that the priests of the Lord are polluted
   if they have intercourse with their lawful wives; and, at length
   matters came to such a pitch, that Pope Syricius did not hesitate to
   call marriage "a pollution of the flesh, in which no one can please
   God." What then must become of the poor Apostles, who continued in that
   pollution until death? Here, however, they have contrived a refined
   subtilty to effect their escape; for they say that the Apostles gave up
   the use of the marriage bed, but led about their wives with them, that
   they might receive the fruits of the gospel, or, in other words,
   support at the public expense. As if they could not have been
   maintained by the Churches, unless they wandered about from place to
   place; and farther, as if it were a likely thing that they would run
   hither and thither of their own accord, and without any necessity, in
   order that they might live in idleness at the public expense! For as to
   the explanation given by Ambrose, as referring to other persons' wives,
   who followed the Apostles for the purpose of hearing their doctrine, it
   is exceedingly forced.

   7. Who hath gone a warfare at his own charges? It is the present tense
   that is used [483] as meaning -- is accustomed to go a warfare. I have,
   however, with the view of taking off somewhat of the harshness,
   rendered it in the preterite. Now, by three comparisons, and these,
   too, taken from common life, he makes it out that it was allowable for
   him to live, if he chose, at the public expense of the Church, to show
   that he assumes nothing to himself but what human nature itself teaches
   us is reasonable. The first is taken from military law, for soldiers
   are wont to have their provisions furnished to them at the public
   expense. The second is taken from vine-dressers, for the husbandman
   plants a vine -- not to throw away his pains, but to gather the fruit.
   The third is taken from keepers of cattle, for the shepherd does not
   lay out his labor for nothing, but eats of the milk of the flock --
   that is, he is supported from the produce. As natural equity points out
   this as reasonable, who will be so unjust as to refuse sustenance to
   the pastors of the Church? While it may happen, that some serve as
   soldiers at their own expense, as, for example, the Romans in ancient
   times, when no tribute was as yet paid, and there were no taxes, [484]
   this does not militate against Paul's statement, for he simply takes
   his argument from common and everywhere received practice.

   8. Say I these things as a man? Lest any one should cavil, and say that
   in the things of the Lord the case is different, and therefore that he
   had to no purpose brought forward so many comparisons, he now adds,
   that the very same thing is commanded by the Lord. To speak as a man
   sometimes means -- speaking according to the perverse judgment of the
   flesh, (as in Romans 3:5.) Here, however, it means -- bringing forward
   only those things that are in common use among men, and are merely
   current (as they speak) in a human court. Now, that God himself
   designed that the labors of men should be remunerated by wages, he
   proves from this, that he prohibits the muzzling of the mouth of the ox
   that treadeth out the corn; and with the view of applying it to the
   subject in hand, he says, that God was not concerned as to oxen, but
   rather had regard to men.

   In the first place, it may be asked, Why has he more particularly
   selected this proof, while he had in the law passages that were much
   clearer? as for example, Deuteronomy 24:15,

   The wages of the hireling shall not remain with thee over night.

   If any one, however, will take a nearer view, he will acknowledge that
   there is more force in this quotation, in which the Lord requires
   cattle to be taken care of, for from this it is inferred, from the less
   to the greater, how much equity he requires among men, when he wishes
   that it should be shown to brute animals. When he says, that God does
   not take care for oxen, you are not to understand him as meaning to
   exclude oxen from the care of God's Providence, inasmuch as he does not
   overlook even the least sparrow. (Matthew 6:26, and Matthew 10:29.) Nor
   is it as if he meant to expound that precept allegorically, as some
   hair-brained spirits take occasion from this to turn everything into
   allegories. Thus they turn dogs into men, trees into angels, and turn
   all scripture into a laughing-stock.

   Paul's meaning is simple -- that, when the Lord enjoins humanity to
   oxen, he does not do it for the sake of oxen, but rather from a regard
   to men, on whose account, too, the very oxen were created. That
   compassion, therefore, towards oxen should be a stimulus to us to stir
   up to the exercise of humanity among us, as Solomon says, (Proverbs
   12:10,)

   The righteous man hath a care over his beast,
   but the bowels of the wicked are cruel.

   Let it then be understood by you, that God is not so concerned for
   oxen, as to have had merely a regard to oxen in making that law, for he
   had mankind in view, and wished to accustom them to equity, that they
   might not defraud the workman of his hire. For it is not the ox that
   has the principal part in plowing or treading out the corn, but man, by
   whose industry the ox himself is set to work. Hence, what he
   immediately adds -- He that ploweth, should plow in hope, etc. is an
   exposition of the precept, as if he had said, that it extends generally
   to any kind of recompense for labor.

   10. Because he that ploweth ought to plow in hope. There is a twofold
   reading in this passage, even in the Greek manuscripts, but the one
   that is more generally received is -- He that thrasheth, in hope of
   partaking of his hope At the same time, the one that does not repeat
   the term hope twice in the second clause appears simpler, and more
   natural. [485] Hence, if I were at liberty to choose, I would prefer to
   read it thus: He that ploweth should plow in hope, and he that
   thrasheth in hope of participating As, however, the most of the Greek
   manuscripts agree in the former reading, and as the meaning remains the
   same, I have not ventured to make change upon it. Now he expounds the
   preceding injunction, and hence he says, that it is an unjust thing
   that the husbandman should lay out his pains to no purpose in plowing
   and thrashing, but that the end of his labor is the hope of receiving
   the fruits. As it is so, we may infer, that this belongs to oxen also,
   but Paul's intention was to extend it farther, and apply it principally
   to men. Now, the husbandman is said to be a partaker of his hope, when
   he enjoys the produce which he has obtained when reaping, but hoped for
   when plowing.

   11. If we have sown unto you spiritual things There was one cavil
   remaining -- for it might be objected, that labors connected with this
   life should without doubt have food and clothing as their reward; and
   that plowing and thrashing yield fruit, of which those that labor in
   these things are partakers; but that it is otherwise with the gospel,
   because its fruit is spiritual; and hence the minister of the word, if
   he would receive fruit corresponding to his labor, ought to demand
   nothing that is carnal. Lest any one, therefore, should cavil in this
   manner, he argues from the greater to the less. "Though food and
   clothing are not of the same nature with a minister's labors, what
   injury do you sustain, if you recompense what is inestimable with a
   thing that is small and contemptible? For in proportion to the
   superiority of the soul above the body, does the word of the Lord excel
   outward sustenance, [486] inasmuch as it is the food of the soul."

   12. If others assume this power over you Again he establishes his own
   right from the example of others. For why should he alone be denied
   what others assumed as their due? For as no one labored more than he
   among the Corinthians, no one was more deserving of a reward. He does
   not, however, make mention of what he has done, but of what he would
   have done in accordance with his right, if he had not of his own accord
   refrained from using it.

   But we have not used this power. He returns now to the point on which
   the matter hinges -- that he had of his own accord given up that power
   which no one could refuse him, and that he was prepared rather to
   suffer all things, than by the use of his liberty throw any impediment
   in the way of the progress of the gospel. He wishes, therefore, that
   the Corinthians should, after his example, keep this end in view -- to
   do nothing that would hinder or retard the progress of the gospel; for
   what he declares respecting himself it was their duty to perform
   according to their station; and he confirms here what he had said
   previously -- that we must consider what is expedient (1 Corinthians
   6:12.)
     __________________________________________________________________

   [477] "Ne suis-ie point Apostre? ne suis-ie point en liberte;" -- "Am I
   not an Apostle? Am I not free?" "The order of the words in Calvin's
   Latin version is the order in which they are read in the Vat., Alex.,
   and some other MSS. and ancient versions, and in which they are quoted
   by Origen, Tertullian and Augustine...The Latin retains the primitive
   order; we read, therefore, in Wiclif's version -- "Whether I am not
   free? am I not Apostle?" -- Penn. Ed.

   [478] "De ne trauailler point;" -- "To refrain from working."

   [479] "La verite et l'effet le demonstre;" -- "Truth and reality
   demonstrate it."

   [480] "Ceux qui vouloyent mettre en debat son Apostolat, et le
   contreroller, comme on dit;" -- "Those who were desirous to bring his
   Apostleship into dispute, and overhale it, as they say."

   [481] The expression is made use of by Suetonius. (Aug. 33.) Reum ita
   fertur interrogasse. He is said to have interrogated the criminal in
   such a manner.) -- Ed.

   [482] "Combion qu'il n'en air pus use;" -- "Though he had not made use
   of it."

   [483] The verb is strateuetai, goeth a warfare, or serves as a soldier.
   -- Ed

   [484] The Roman soldiers received no pay (stipendium) from the public
   expense until 347 years after the founding of Rome. (See Liv. 4. 59 and
   5. 7.) -- Ed.

   [485] The common reading is -- kai ho aloon tos enpidos autou metechein
   ep ' elpidi, and he that thrasheth in hope should be a partaker of his
   hope In the other reading, the ep ' elpidi (in hope) are omitted. The
   latter is the reading in five ancient and three later MSS. The common
   reading is construed by Bloomfield as follows -- kai ho aloon (opheilei
   aloan) ep ' elpidi (tou) metechein tos elpidos autou "And he that
   thrasheth ought to thrash in hope to partake of (the fruits of) his
   hope." -- Ed

   [486] "Et le vestement;" -- "And clothing."
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 9:13-22

   13. Do ye not know that they which minister about holy things live of
   the things of the temple; and they which wait at the altar are
   partakers with the altar?

   13. Nescitis, quod qui sacris operantur, ex sacrario [487] edunt? et
   qui altari ministrant (ad verbum: adstant) altaris sunt participes?

   14. Even so hath the Lord ordained that they which preach the gospel
   should live of the gospel.

   14. Sic et Dominns ordinavit, ut qui Evangelium annuntiant, vivant ex
   Evangelio.

   15. But I have used none of these things: neither have I written these
   things, that it should be so done unto me: for it were better for me to
   die, than that any man should make my glorying void.

   15. Ego autem nullo horum usus sum: neque vero haec scripsi, ut ita
   mihi fiat: mihi enim satius est mori, quam ut gloriam meam quis
   exinaniat.

   16. For though I preach the gospel, I have nothing to glory of: for
   necessity is laid upon me; yea, woe is unto me, iflpreach not the
   gospel!

   16. Nam si evangelizavero, non est quod glorier: quandoquidem
   necessitas mihi incumbit, ut vae sit mihi, si non evangelizem.

   17. For if I do this thing willingly, I have a reward: but if against
   my will, a dispensation of the gospel is committed unto me.

   17. Si enim volens hoc facio, mercedem habeo: si autem invitus,
   dispensatio mihi eat credita.

   18. What is my reward then? Verily that, when I preach the gospel, I
   may make the gospel of Christ without charge, that I abuse not my power
   in the gospel.

   18. Quae igitur mihi merces? ut quum evangelizo, gratuitum impendam
   Evangelium Christi, ut non abutar potestate mea in Evangelio.

   19. For though I be free from all men, yet have I made myself servant
   unto all, that I might gain the more.

   19. Liber enim quum essem ab omnibus, servum me omnibus feci, ut plures
   lucrifaciam.

   20. And unto the Jews I became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews; to
   them that are under the law, as under the law, that I might gain them
   that are under the law;

   20. Itaque factus sum Iudaeis tanquam Iudaeus, ut Iudaeos lucrifaciam:
   iis qui sub Lege erant, tanquam Legi subiectus, ut eos qui erant sub
   Lege lucrifaciam;

   21. To them that are without law, as without law, (being not without
   law to God, but under the law to Christ,) that I might gain them that
   are without law.

   21. his qui sine Lege erant, tanquam exlex, (tametsi non absque Lege,
   Deo, sed subiectus Legi Christi,) ut eos qui sine Lege erant
   lucrifaciam.

   22. To the weak became I as weak, that I might gain the weak: I am made
   all things to all men, that I might by all means save some.

   22. Factus sum infirmis tanquam infirmus, ut infirmos lucrifaciam:
   omnibus omnis factus sum, ut omnino aliquos servem.


   13. Know ye not, Apart from the question that he discusses, he appears
   to have dwelt the longer in taking notice of this point, with the view
   of reproaching the Corinthians indirectly for their malignity in
   allowing the ministers of Christ to be reviled in a matter that was so
   justifiable. For if Paul had not of his own accord refrained from using
   his liberty, there was a risk of the progress of the gospel being
   obstructed. Never would the false Apostles have gained that point, had
   not ingratitude, to which the Corinthians were already prone, opened up
   the way for their calumnies. For they ought to have repelled them
   sharply; but instead of this they showed themselves excessively
   credulous, so that they would have been prepared to reject the gospel,
   if Paul had used his right. Such contempt of the gospel, and such
   cruelty towards their Apostle, deserved to be more severely reproved;
   but Paul, having found another occasion, touches upon it indirectly and
   mildly, with his usual modesty, that he may admonish them without
   affronting them.

   Again he makes use of a new comparison, to prove that he had not used
   the power that he had from the Lord. Nor does he any longer borrow
   examples from any other source, but shows that this has been appointed
   by the Lord -- that the Churches should provide for the support of
   their ministers. There are some that think that there are two
   comparisons in this passage, and they refer the former to the Lord's
   priests, and the latter to those that acted as priests to the heathen
   gods. I am, however, rather of opinion that Paul expresses, as he is
   accustomed, the same thing by different terms. And, truly, it would
   have been a weak argument that was derived from the practice of the
   heathens, among whom the revenues of the priesthood were not devoted to
   food and clothing, but to magnificent dresses, royal splendor, and
   profuse luxury. These would, therefore, have been things too remote. I
   do not call it in question, however, that he has pointed out different
   kinds of ministerial offices; for there were priests of a higher order,
   and there were afterwards Levites, who were inferior to them, as is
   well known; but that is not much to the point.

   The sum is this -- "The Levitical priests were ministers of the
   Israelitish Church; the Lord appointed them sustenance from their
   ministry; hence in ministers of the Christian Church the same equity
   must be observed at the present day. Now the ministers of the Christian
   Church are those that preach the gospel." This passage is quoted by
   Canonists, when they wish to prove that idle bellies must be fattened
   up, in order that they may perform their masses; [488] but how
   absurdly, I leave it to children themselves to judge. Whatever is
   stated in the Scriptures as to the support to be given to ministers, or
   the honor that is to be put upon them, they immediately seize hold of
   it, and twist it to their own advantage. For my part, however, I simply
   admonish my readers to consider attentively Paul's words. He argues
   that pastors, who labor in the preaching of the gospel, ought to be
   supported, because the Lord in ancient times appointed sustenance for
   the priests, on the ground of their serving the Church. Hence a
   distinction must be made between the ancient priesthood and that of the
   present day. Priests under the law were set apart to preside over the
   sacrifices, to serve the altar, and to take care of the tabernacle and
   temple. Those at the present day are set apart to preach the word and
   to dispense the sacraments. The Lord has appointed no sacrifices for
   his sacred ministers to be engaged in; [489] there are no altars for
   them to stand at to offer sacrifices.

   Hence appears the absurdity of those who apply this comparison, taken
   from sacrifices, to anything else than to the preaching of the gospel.
   Nay farther, it may be readily inferred from this passage, that all
   Popish priests, from the head himself to the lowest member, are guilty
   of sacrilege, who devour the revenues appointed for true ministers,
   while they do not in any way discharge their duty. For what ministers
   does the Apostle order to be maintained? Those that apply themselves to
   the preaching of the gospel. What right then have they to claim for
   themselves the revenues of the priesthood? [490] "Because they hum a
   tune and perform mass." [491] But God has enjoined upon them nothing of
   that sort. Hence it is evident that they seize upon the reward due to
   others. When, however, he says that the Levitical priests were
   partakers with the altar, and that they ate of the things of the
   Temple, he marks out (metonumikos) by metonymy, the offerings that were
   presented to God. For they claimed to themselves the sacred victims
   entire, and of smaller animals they took the right shoulder, and
   kidneys and tail, and, besides this, tithes, oblations, and
   first-fruits. The word hieron, therefore, in the second instance, [492]
   is taken to mean the Temple.

   15. Nor have I written these things As he might seem to be making it
   his aim, that in future a remuneration should be given him by the
   Corinthians, he removes that suspicion, and declares that, so far from
   this being his desire, he would rather die than give occasion for his
   being deprived of this ground of glorying -- that he bestowed labor
   upon the Corinthians without any reward. Nor is it to be wondered that
   he set so high a value upon this glorying, inasmuch as he saw that the
   authority of the gospel in some degree depended upon it. For he would
   in this way have given a handle to the false apostles to triumph over
   him. Hence there was a danger, lest the Corinthians, despising him,
   should receive them with great applause. So much did he prefer, even
   before his own life, the power of advancing the gospel.

   16. For if I preach the gospel. To show how very important it was not
   to deprive himself of that ground of glorying, he intimates what would
   have happened, if he had simply discharged his ministry -- that he
   would in this way have done nothing else than what the Lord had
   enjoined upon him by a strict necessity By doing that, he says, he
   would have had no occasion for glorying, as it was not in his power to
   avoid doing it. [493] It is asked, however, what glorying he here
   refers to, for he glories elsewhere in his exercising himself in the
   office of teaching with a pure conscience (2 Timothy 1:3.) I answer,
   that he speaks of a glorying that he could bring forward in opposition
   to the false apostles, when they endeavored to find a pretext for
   reviling, as will appear more fully from what follows.

   This is a remarkable statement, from which we learn, in the first
   place, what, as to ministers, is the nature, and what the closeness of
   the tie that is involved in their calling, and farther, what the
   pastoral office imports and includes. Let not the man, then, who has
   been once called to it, imagine that he is any longer at liberty to
   withdraw when he chooses, if, perhaps, he is harassed with vexatious
   occurrences, or weighed down with misfortunes, for he is devoted to the
   Lord and to the Church, and bound by a sacred tie, which it were
   criminal to break asunder. As to the second point, [494] he says that a
   curse was ready to fall upon him, if he did not preach the gospel Why?
   Because he has been called to it, and therefore is constrained by
   necessity How, therefore, will any one who succeeds to his office avoid
   this necessity? What sort of successors, then, have the Apostles in the
   Pope and the other mitred bishops, who think that there is nothing that
   is more unbecoming their station, than the duty of teaching!

   17. For if I do this thing willingly By reward here is meant what the
   Latins term operae pretium, recompense for labor, [495] and what he had
   previously termed glorying Others, however, interpret it otherwise --
   as meaning that a reward is set before all who discharge their duty
   faithfully and heartily. But, for my part, I understand the man who
   does this thing willingly, to be the man who acts with such
   cheerfulness, that, being intent upon edifying, as his one object of
   desire, he declines nothing that he knows will be profitable to the
   Church; as, on the other hand, he terms those unwilling, who in their
   actings submit, indeed, to necessity, but act grudgingly, because it is
   not from inclination. For it always happens that the man who undertakes
   any business with zeal, is also prepared of his own accord to submit to
   everything, which, if left undone, would hinder the accomplishment of
   the work. Thus Paul, being one that acted willingly, did not teach in a
   mere perfunctory manner, but left nothing undone that he knew to be
   fitted to promote and further his doctrine. This then was his
   recompense for labor, [496] and this his ground of glorying -- that he
   did with readiness of mind forego his right in respect of his applying
   himself to the discharge of his office willingly and with fervent zeal.

   But if unwillingly, a dispensation is committed to me. In whatever way
   others explain these words, the natural meaning, in my opinion, is this
   -- that God does not by any means approve of the service done by the
   man who performs it grudgingly, and, as it were, with a reluctant mind.
   Whenever, therefore, God has enjoined anything upon us, we are
   mistaken, if we think that we have discharged it aright, when we
   perform it grudgingly; for the Lord requires that his servants be
   cheerful, (2 Corinthians 9:7,) so as to delight in obeying him, and
   manifest their cheerfulness by the promptitude with which they act. In
   short, Paul means, that he would act in accordance with his calling,
   only in the event of his performing his duty willingly and cheerfully.

   18. What then is my reward? He infers from what goes before, that he
   has a ground of glorying; in this, that he labored gratuitously in
   behalf of the Corinthians, because it appears from this, that he
   applied himself willingly to the office of teaching, inasmuch as he
   vigorously set himself to obviate all the hindrances in the way of the
   gospel; and not satisfied with merely teaching, endeavored to further
   the doctrine of it by every method. This then is the sum. "I am under
   the necessity of preaching the gospel: if I do it not, wo is unto me,
   for I resist God's calling. But it is not enough to preach, unless I do
   it willingly; for he who fulfils the commandment of God unwillingly,
   does not act, as becomes him, suitably to his office. But if I obey God
   willingly, it will in that case be allowable for me to glory. Hence it
   was necessary for me to make the gospel without charge, that I might
   glory on good ground."

   Papists endeavor from this passage to establish their contrivance as to
   works of supererogation. [497] "Paul," they say, "would have fulfilled
   the duties of his office by preaching the gospel, but he adds something
   farther over and above. Hence he does something beyond what he is bound
   to do, for he distinguishes between what is done willingly and what is
   done from necessity." I answer, that Paul, it is true, went a greater
   length than the ordinary calling of pastors required, because he
   refrained from taking pay, which the Lord allows pastors to take. But
   as it was a part of his duty to provide against every occasion of
   offense that he foresaw, and as he saw, that the course of the gospel
   would be impeded, if he made use of his liberty, though that was out of
   the ordinary course, yet I maintain that even in that case he rendered
   to God nothing more than was due. For I ask: "Is it not the part of a
   good pastor to remove occasions of offense, so far as it is in his
   power to do so?" I ask again, "Did Paul do anything else than this?"
   There is no ground, therefore, for imagining that he rendered to God
   anything that he did not owe to him, inasmuch as he did nothing but
   what the necessity of his office (though it was an extraordinary
   necessity) demanded. Away, then, with that wicked imagination, [498]
   that we compensate for our faults in the sight of God by works of
   supererogation. [499] Nay more, away with the very term, which is
   replete with diabolical pride. [500] This passage, assuredly, is
   mistakenly perverted to bear that meaning.

   The error of Papists is refuted in a general way in this manner:
   Whatever works are comprehended under the law, are falsely termed works
   of supererogation, as is manifest from the words of Christ. (Luke
   17:10.)

   When ye have done all things that are commanded you, say,
   We are unprofitable servants: we have done what we were bound to do.

   Now we acknowledge that no work is good and acceptable to God, that is
   not included in God's law. This second statement I prove in this way:
   There are two classes of good works; for they are all reducible either
   to the service of God or to love. Now nothing belongs to the service of
   God that is not included in this summary: Thou shalt love the Lord with
   all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy strength There is also
   no duty of love that is not required in that precept -- Love thy
   neighbor as thyself (Mark 12:30, 31.) But as to the objection that is
   brought forward by Papists, that it is possible for one to be
   acceptable, if he devotes the tenth part of his income, and infer from
   this, that if he goes so far as to devote the fifth part, he does a
   work of supererogation, it is easy to remove away this subtilty. For
   that the deeds of the pious are approved, is not by any means owing to
   their perfection, but it is because the imperfection and deficiency are
   not reckoned to their account. Hence even if they were doing an
   hundred-fold more than they do, they would not, even in that case,
   exceed the limits of the duty that they owe.

   That I may not abuse my power. From this it appears, that such a use of
   our liberty as gives occasion of offense, is an uncontrolled liberty
   and abuse. We must keep, therefore, within bounds, that we may not give
   occasion of offense. This passage also confirms more fully what I just
   now touched upon, that Paul did nothing beyond what the duty of his
   office required, because it was not proper that the liberty, that was
   allowed him by God, should be in any way abused.

   19. Though I was free from all. Ek panton, that is, from all, may be
   taken either in the neuter gender or in the masculine. If in the
   neuter, it will refer to things; if in the masculine, to persons I
   prefer the second He has as yet shown only by one particular instance
   how carefully he had accommodated himself to the weak. Now he subjoins
   a general statement, and afterwards enumerates several instances. The
   general observation is this -- that while he was not under the power of
   any one, he lived as if he had been subject to the inclination of all,
   and of his own accord subjected himself to the weak, to whom he was
   under no subjection. The particular instances are these -- that among
   the Gentiles he lived as if he were a Gentile, and among the Jews he
   acted as a Jew: that is, while among Jews he carefully observed the
   ceremonies of the law, he was no less careful not to give occasion of
   offense to the Gentiles by the observance of them.

   He adds the particle as, to intimate that his liberty was not at all
   impaired on that account, for, however he might accommodate himself to
   men, he nevertheless remained always like himself inwardly in the sight
   of God. To become all things is to assume all appearances, as the case
   may require, or to put on different characters, according to the
   diversity among individuals. As to what he says respecting his being
   without law and under the law, you must understand it simply in
   reference to the ceremonial department; for the department connected
   with morals was common to Jews and Gentiles alike, and it would not
   have been allowable for Paul to gratify men to that extent. For this
   doctrine holds good only as to things indifferent, as has been
   previously remarked.

   21. Though not without law to God. He wished by this parenthesis to
   soften the harshness of the expression, for it might. have seemed harsh
   at first view to have it said, that he had come to be without law.
   Hence in order that this might not be taken in a wrong sense, he had
   added, by way of correction, that he had always kept in view one law --
   that of subjection to Christ. By this too he hints that odium was
   excited against him groundlessly and unreasonably, as if he called men
   to an unbridled licentiousness, while he taught exemption from the
   bondage of the Mosaic law. Now he calls it expressly the law of Christ,
   in order to wipe away the groundless reproach, with which the false
   apostles branded the gospel, for he means, that in the doctrine of
   Christ nothing is omitted, that might serve to give us a perfect rule
   of upright. living.

   22. To the weak I became as weak Now again he employs a general
   statement, in which he shows to what sort of persons he accomodated
   himself, and with what design. He judaized in the presence of the Jews,
   but not before them all, for there were many headstrong persons, who,
   under the influence of Pharisaical pride or malice, would have wished
   that Christian liberty were altogether taken away. To those persons he
   would never have been so accommodating, for Christ would not have us
   care for persons of that sort.

   Let them alone, (says he,) they are blind, and leaders of the blind.
   (Matthew 15:14.)

   Hence we must accommodate ourselves to the weak, not to the obstinate.
   [501]

   Now his design was, that he might bring them to Christ -- not that he
   might promote his own advantage, or retain their good will. To these
   things a third must be added -- that it was only in things indifferent,
   that are otherwise in our choice, that he accommodated himself to the
   weak. Now, if we consider how great a man Paul was, who stooped thus
   far, ought we not to feel ashamed -- we who are next to nothing in
   comparison with him -- if, bound up in self, we look with disdain upon
   the weak, and do not deign to yield up a single point to them? But
   while it is proper that we should accommodate ourselves to the weak,
   according to the Apostle's injunction, and that, in things indifferent,
   and with a view to their edification, those act an improper part, who,
   with the view of consulting their own ease, avoid those things that
   would offend men, and the wicked, too, rather than the weak. Those,
   however, commit a two-fold error, who do not distinguish between things
   indifferent and things unlawful, and accordingly do not hesitate, for
   the sake of pleasing men, to engage in things that the Lord has
   prohibited. The crowning point, however, of the evil is this -- that
   they abuse this statement of Paul to excuse their wicked dissimulation.
   But if any one will keep in view these three things that I have briefly
   pointed out, he will have it easily in his power to refute those
   persons.

   We must observe, also, the word that he makes use of in the concluding
   clause; [502] for he shows for what purpose he endeavors to gain all --
   with a view to their salvation. At the same time, he here at length
   modifies the general statement, unless perhaps you prefer the rendering
   of the old translation, which is found even at this day in some Greek
   manuscripts. [503] For in this place, too, he repeats it -- that I may
   by all means save some [504] But as the indulgent temper, that Paul
   speaks of, has sometimes no good effect, this limitation is very
   suitable -- that, although he might not do good to all, he,
   nevertheless, had never left off consulting the advantage of at least a
   few. [505]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [487] "Des choses qui sont sacrifiees;" -- "Of the things that are
   sacrificed."

   [488] "Et autres brimborioas;" -- "And other baubles."

   [489] "Auiourd'huy;" -- "At the present day."

   [490] "De quel droict s'usurpent ces ventres paresseux le reuenu des
   benefices, qu'ils appelent?" -- "By what right do these lazy bellies
   claim to themselves the revenue of the benefices, as they call it?"

   [491] "Pource qu'ils gringotent des messes et anniuersaires;" --
   "Because they hum a tune at masses and anniversaries."

   [492] In the original, the words ta hiera and tou hierou, occur in the
   same clause, and our Author's meaning is, that in the second instance
   the noun hieron, denotes the temple. -- Ed

   [493] "Veu qu'il y estoit contraint, et ne pouuoit euiter telle
   necessite;" -- "Inasmuch as he was constrained to it, and could not
   avoid such a necessity."

   [494] That is, the duty which the pastoral office involves. -- Ed.

   [495] "Ce que nous appelons chef-d'oeuvre;" -- "What we call a
   masterpiece." The idiomatic phrase, operae pretium, is ordinarily
   employed by the classical writers to mean -- something of importance,
   or worthwhile. Thus Livy, in his Preface, says: "facturusne operae
   pretium sim;" -- "whether I am about to do a work of importance," and
   Cicero (Cat. 4. 8) says: "Operae pretium est;" -- "It is worth while."
   Calvin, however, seems to make use of the phrase here in a sense more
   nearly akin to its original and literal signification -- recompense for
   labor -- what amply rewarded the self-denial that he had exercised --
   consisting in the peculiar satisfaction afforded to his mind in
   reflecting on the part that he had acted. The term made use of by him
   in his French Translation -- chef-d'oeuure (masterpiece) corresponds
   with the Latin phrase operae pretium in this respect, that a
   masterpiece is a work, which the successful artist, or workman, sets a
   value upon, and in which he feels satisfaction, as amply recompensing
   the pains bestowed. -- Ed.

   [496] "Son chef-d'oeuure;" -- "His masterpiece."

   [497] "C'est a dire, d'abondant;" -- "That is to say, over and above."

   [498] "Ceste perverse et mal-heureuse imagination;" -- "That perverse
   and miserable fancy."

   [499] "C'est a dire, lesquelles nous faisons de superabondant;" --
   "That is to say, what we do over and above."

   [500] Our Author expresses himself in similar terms elsewhere as to the
   word merit. See Harmony, [14]vol. 2, p. 197. -- Ed.

   [501] The reader will find this sentiment more fully brought out in the
   Harmony, [15]volume 2, p. 258. -- Ed.

   [502] "Afin que totalement i'en sauue quelques uns;" -- "That I may by
   all means save some."

   [503] The rendering of the Vulgate, referred to by Calvin, is -- Ut
   omnes servarem, (That I might save all.) Four ancient Greek MSS. have
   pantas soso, that I might save all The same rendering is given in the
   Syriac version, and is embraced by Mill, Benzelius, and Bp. Pearce. In
   Wiclif's version, (1380,) the rendering is -- "To alle men I am made
   alle things to make alle saaf." In the Rheims version, (1582,) it is
   rendered -- "That I might saue al." -- Ed

   [504] "Afin queie sauue tous;" -- "That I may save all."

   [505] "Le profit et salut pour le moths de quelques uns;" -- "The
   profit and welfare of at least some individuals."
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 9:23-27

   23. And this I do for the gospel's sake, that I might be partaker there
   of with you

   23. Hoc autem facio propter Evangelium, ut particeps eius fiam.

   24. Know ye not that they which run in a race run all, but one
   receiveth the prize? So run, that ye may obtain.

   24. An nescitis, quod qui in stadium currunt, omnes quidem currunt, sed
   unus accipit praemium? Sic currite, ut comprehendatis.

   25. And every man that striveth for the mastery is temperate in all
   things. Now they do it to obtain a corruptible crown; but we an
   incorruptible.

   25. Porro quicunque certat, per omnia temperans est: [506] illi quidem
   igitur, ut perituram coronam accipiant, nos autem, ut aeternam.

   26. I therefore so run, not as uncertainly; so fight I, not as one that
   beateth the air:

   26. Ego itaque sic curro, ut non in incertum: sic pugilem ago, non
   velut aerem fortens:

   27. But I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection: lest that
   by any means, when I have preached to others, I myself should be a
   castaway.

   27. Verum subigo corpus meum, et in servitutem redigo, ne quo modo
   fiat, ut, quum aliis praedicaverim, ipse reprobus [507] efficiar.


   23. That I may become a partaker of it. As the Corinthians might think
   with themselves, that this was a peculiarity in Paul's case on the
   ground of his office, he argues, from the very design of it, that this
   is common to all Christians. For when he declares, that his aim had
   been, that he might become a partaker of the gospel, he indirectly
   intimates, that all who do not act the same part with him are unworthy
   of the fellowship of the gospel. To become a partaker of the gospel is
   to receive the fruit of it.

   24. Know ye not, that they who run in a race. He has laid down the
   doctrine, and now, with the view of impressing it upon the minds of the
   Corinthians, he adds an exhortation. He states briefly, that what they
   had hitherto attained was nothing, unless they steadfastly persevered,
   inasmuch as it is not enough to have once entered on the Lord's way, if
   they do not strive until they reach the goal, agreeably to that
   declaration of Christ -- He that shall endure unto the end, etc.
   (Matthew 10:22.) Now he borrows a similitude from the race-course.
   [508] For as in that case many descend into the arena, but he alone is
   crowned who has first reached the goal, so there is no reason why any
   one should feel satisfied with himself on the ground of his having once
   entered upon the race prescribed in the gospel, unless he persevere in
   it until death. There is, however, this difference between our contest
   and theirs, that among them only one is victorious, and obtains the
   palm -- the man who has got before all the others; [509] but our
   condition is superior in this respect, that there may be many at the
   same time. [510] For God requires from us nothing more than that we
   press on vigorously until we reach the goal. [511] Thus one does not
   hinder another: nay more, those who run in the Christian race are
   mutually helpful to each other. He expresses the same sentiment in
   another form in 2 Timothy 2:5,

   If any one striveth, he is not crowned, unless he strives lawfully.

   So run. Here we have the application of the similitude -- that it is
   not enough to have set out, if we do not continue to run during our
   whole life. For our life is like a race-course. We must not therefore
   become wearied after a short time, like one that stops short in the
   middle of the race-course, but instead of this, death alone must put a
   period to our running. The particle houto, (so,) may be taken in two
   ways. Chrysostom connects it with what goes before, in this manner: as
   those who run do not stop running until they have reached the goal, so
   do ye also persevere, and do not stop running so long as you live. It
   will, however, correspond not inaptly with what follows. "You must not
   run so as to stop short in the middle of the race-course, but so as to
   obtain the prize." As to the term stadium, (race-course,) and the
   different kinds of races, [512] I say nothing, as these things may be
   obtained from grammarians, and it is generally known that there were
   some races on horseback, and others on foot. Nor are these things
   particularly needed for understanding Paul's meaning.

   25. Now every one that striveth. As he had exhorted to perseverance, it
   remained to state in what way they must persevere. This second thing he
   now sets before them by a comparison taken from pugilists; not indeed
   in every particular, [513] but in so far as was required by the subject
   in hand, within which he confines himself -- how far they ought to
   yield to the weakness of the brethren. Now he argues from the less to
   the greater, that it is an unseemly thing if we grudge to give up our
   right, inasmuch as the pugilists eating their coliphium, [514] and that
   sparingly and not to the full, voluntarily deny themselves every
   delicacy, in order that they may have more agility for the combat, and
   they do this, too, for the sake of a corruptible crown But if they
   value so highly a crown of leaves that quickly fades, what value ought
   we to set upon a crown of immortality? Let us not, therefore, think it
   hard to give up a little of our right. It is well known that wrestlers
   were contented with the most frugal diet, so that their simple fare has
   become proverbial.

   26. I therefore so run He returns to speak of himself, that his
   doctrine may have the more weight, on his setting himself forward by
   way of pattern. What. he says here some refer to assurance of hope --
   (Hebrews 6:11) -- "I do not run in vain, nor do I run the risk of
   losing my labor, for I have the Lord's promise, which never deceives."
   It rather appears to me, however, that his object is to direct the
   course of believers straight forward toward the goal, that it may not
   be wavering and devious. "The Lord exercises us here in the way of
   running and wrestling, but he sets before us the object at which we
   ought to aim, and prescribes a sure rule for our wrestling, that we may
   not weary ourselves in vain." Now he takes in both the similitudes that
   he had employed. "I know," says he, "whither I am running, and, like a
   skillful wrestler, I am anxious that I may not miss my aim." Those
   things ought to kindle up and confirm the Christian breast, so as to
   devote itself with greater alacrity to all the duties of piety; [515]
   for it is a great matter not to wander in ignorance through uncertain
   windings.

   27. But I keep under my body [516] Budaeus reads Observo; (I keep a
   watch over;) but in my opinion the Apostle has employed the word
   hupopiazein [517] here, to mean treating in a servile manner [518] For
   he declares that he does not indulge self, but restrains his
   inclinations -- which cannot be accomplished unless the body is tamed,
   and, by being held back from its inclinations, is habituated to
   subjection, like a wild and refractory steed. The ancient monks, with a
   view to yield obedience to this precept contrived many exercises of
   discipline, for they slept on benches, they forced themselves to long
   watchings, and shunned delicacies. The main thing, however, was wanting
   in them, for they did not apprehend why it was that the Apostle enjoins
   this, because they lost sight of another injunction --

   to take no concern for our flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof.
   (Romans 13:14.)

   For what he says elsewhere (1 Timothy 4:8) always holds good -- that
   bodily exercise profiteth little. Let us, however, treat the body so as
   to make a slave of it, [519] that it may not, by its wantonness, keep
   us back from the duties of piety; and farther, that we may not indulge
   it, so as to occasion injury, or offense, to others.

   That, when I have preached to others Some explain these words in this
   way -- "Lest, after having taught others with propriety and
   faithfulness, I should incur the judgment of condemnation in the sight
   of God by a wicked life." But it will suit better to view this
   expression as referring to men, in this way -- "My life ought to be a
   kind of rule to others. Accordingly, I strive to conduct myself in such
   a manner, that my character and conduct may not be inconsistent with my
   doctrine, and that thus I may not, with great disgrace to myself, and a
   grievous occasion of offense to my brethren, neglect those things which
   I require from others." It may also be taken in connection with a
   preceding statement, (1 Corinthians 9:23,) in this way -- "Lest I
   should be defrauded of the gospel, of which others are partakers
   through means of my labors."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [506] "Il s'abstient en toutes choses, ou -- vit entierement par
   regime;" -- "He abstains in all things, or -- he lives entirely
   according to prescribed rule."

   [507] "Reprouue, ou, trouue non rcceuable;" -- "Reprobate, or, found
   not admissible."

   [508] "De ceux qui conrent a la lice pour quelque pris;" -- "From those
   who run in the race-course for some prize."

   [509] "Qui a mieux couru que los antres, et est le premier venu au
   but;" -- "Who has run better than the others, and has come first to the
   goal."

   [510] "I1 yen pent auoir plusieurs de nons qui soyent couronnez;" --
   "There may be many of us that are crowned."

   [511] "Que nons ne perdions point courage, mais que perscuerions
   constamment jusques a la fin;" -- "That we do not lose heart, but
   persevere steadfastly unto the end."

   [512] "Qui estoyent anciennement en vsage;" -- "Which were anciently in
   use."

   [513] "Non pas qu'il vucille appliquer la similitude en tout et par
   tout;" -- "Not that he meant to apply the similitude out and out."

   [514] "C'estoit vnc sorte de pain propre pour entretenir et augmenter
   la force, duquel vsoyent ordinairement les lutteurs et telles gens. Les
   Grecs le nonmoyent coliphium;" -- "This was a kind of bread that was
   fitted to maintain and increase strength, which was commonly made use
   of by wrestlers, and persons of that sort. The Greeks call it
   coliphium." The term coliphium is supposed to be compounded of kolon, a
   limb, and iph, strongly -- a means of strengthening the limbs It is
   defined by Tymme, in his Translation of Calvin on the Corinthians, to
   be "a kinde of breade whereof the Wrastelers did use in tyme past to
   eate, to be more strong." It is made mention of by Juvenal (2. 53.) --
   Ed

   [515] "Toutes choses concenantes la piete et crainte de Dieu;" -- "All
   things that relate to piety and the fear of God."

   [516] "Mais ie matte et reduy en seruitude mort corps;" -- "But I
   mortify my body, and bring it into servitude."

   [517] Its original meaning is to strike under the eye, being compounded
   of hupo, (under,) and ops, (the eye,) to beat black and blue, as the
   wrestlers were accustomed to do with the cestus (See Arist. Pac. 541.)
   -- Ed

   [518] "Manier rudement et d'une faqon seruile;" -- "To handle roughly,
   and in a servile manner."

   [519] Our author has evidently in view the literal meaning of the
   original word here used doulagogo, I reduce to slavery It is used in
   this sense by Diodorus Siculus. (12. 24.) -- Ed
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 10
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 10:1-5

   1. Moreover, brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that
   all our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea;

   1. Nolo autem vos ignorare, fratres, quod partes nostri omnes sub nube
   fuerunt, et omnes mare transierunt.

   2. And were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea;

   2. Et omnes in Mose uterunt baptizati in nube et in mari,

   3. And did all eat the same spiritual meat;

   3. Et omnes eandem escam spiritualem manducarunt,

   4. And did all drink the same spiritual drink: for they drank of that
   spiritual Rock that followed them: and that Rock was Christ.

   4. Et omnes eundem biberunt spiritualem potum: bibebant autem e
   spirituali, quae eos censequebatur, petra. Petra, autem, erat Christus.

   5. But with many of them God was not well pleased: for they were
   overthrown in the wilderness.

   5. Verum complures corum grati non fuerant Deo: prostrati enim fuerunt
   in deserto.


   What he had previously taught by two similitudes, he now confirms by
   examples. The Corinthians grew wanton, and gloried, as if they had
   served out their time, [520] or at least had finished their course,
   when they had scarcely left the starting-point. This vain exultation
   and confidence he represses in this manner -- "As I see that you are
   quietly taking your ease at the very outset of your course, I would not
   have you ignorant of what befell the people of Israel in consequence of
   this, that their example may arouse you." As, however, on examples
   being adduced, any point of difference destroys the force of the
   comparison, Paul premises, that there is no such dissimilarity between
   us and the Israelites, as to make our condition different from theirs.
   Having it, therefore, in view to threaten the Corinthians with the same
   vengeance as had overtaken them, he begins in this manner -- "Beware of
   glorying in any peculiar privilege, as if you were in higher esteem
   than they were in the sight of God." For they were favored with the
   same benefits as we at this day enjoy; there was a Church of God among
   them, as there is at this day among us; they had the same sacraments,
   to be tokens to them of the grace of God; [521] but, on their abusing
   their privileges, they did not escape the judgment of God. [522] Be
   afraid, therefore; for the same thing is impending over you. Jude makes
   use of the same argument in his Epistle. (Jude 1:5.)

   1. All were under the cloud. The Apostle's object is to show, that the
   Israelites were no less the people of God than we are, that we may
   know, that we will not escape with impunity the hand of God, which
   punished them [523] with so much severity. For the sum is this -- "If
   God spared not them, neither will he spare you, for your condition is
   similar." That similarity he proves from this -- that they had been
   honored with the same tokens of God's grace, for the sacraments are
   badges by which the Church of God is distinguished. He treats first of
   baptism, and teaches that the cloud, which protected the Israelites in
   the desert from the heat of the sun, and directed their course, and
   also their passage through the sea, was to them as a baptism; he says,
   also, that in the manna, and the water flowing from the rock, there was
   a sacrament which corresponded with the sacred Supper.

   They were, says he, baptized in Moses, that is, under the ministry or
   guidance of Moses. For I take the particle eis to be used here instead
   of en, agreeably to the common usage of Scripture, because we are
   assuredly baptized in the name of Christ, and not of any mere man, as
   he has stated in 1 Corinthians 1:13, and that for two reasons. These
   are, first, because we are by baptism initiated [524] into the doctrine
   of Christ alone; and, secondly, because his name alone is invoked,
   inasmuch as baptism is founded on his influence alone. They were,
   therefore, baptized in Moses, that is, under his guidance or ministry,
   as has been already stated. How? In the cloud and in the sea. "They
   were, then, baptized twice," some one will say. I answer, that there
   are two signs made mention of, making, however, but one baptism,
   corresponding to ours.

   Here, however, a more difficult question presents itself. For it is
   certain, that the advantage of those gifts, which Paul makes mention
   of, was temporal. [525] The cloud protected them from the heat of the
   sun, and showed them the way: these are outward advantages of the
   present life. In like manner, their passage through the sea was
   attended with this effect, that they got clear off from Pharaoh's
   cruelty, and escaped from imminent hazard of death. The advantage of
   our baptism, on the other hand, is spiritual. Why then does Paul turn
   earthly benefits into sacraments, and seek to find some spiritual
   mystery [526] in them? I answer, that it was not without good reason
   that Paul sought in miracles of this nature something more than the
   mere outward advantage of the flesh. For, though God designed to
   promote his people's advantage in respect of the present life, what he
   had mainly in view was, to declare and manifest himself to be their
   God, and under that, eternal salvation is comprehended.

   The cloud, in various instances, [527] is called the symbol of his
   presence. As, therefore, he declared by means of it, that he was
   present with them, as his peculiar and chosen people, there can be no
   doubt that, in addition to an earthly advantage, they had in it,
   besides, a token of spiritual life. Thus its use was twofold, as was
   also that of the passage through the sea, for a way was opened up for
   them through the midst of the sea, that they might escape from the hand
   of Pharaoh; but to what was this owing, but to the circumstance, that
   the Lord, having taken them under his guardianship and protection,
   determined by every means to defend them? Hence, they concluded from
   this, that they were the objects of God's care, and that he had their
   salvation in charge. Hence, too, the Passover, which was instituted to
   celebrate the remembrance of their deliverance, was nevertheless, at
   the same time, a sacrament of Christ. How so? Because God had, under a
   temporal benefit, manifested himself as a Savior. Any one that will
   attentively consider these things, will find that there is no absurdity
   in Paul's words. Nay more, he will perceive both in the spiritual
   substance and in the visible sign a most striking correspondence
   between the baptism of the Jews, and ours.

   It is however objected again, that we do not find a word of all this.
   [528] This I admit, but there is no doubt, that God by his Spirit
   supplied the want of outward preaching, as we may see in the instance
   of the brazen serpent, which was, as Christ himself testifies, a
   spiritual sacrament, (John 3:14,) and yet not a word has come down to
   us as to this thing, [529] but the Lord revealed to believers of that
   age, in the manner he thought fit, the secret, which would otherwise
   have remained hid.

   3. The same spiritual meat He now makes mention of the other sacrament,
   which corresponds to the Holy Supper of the Lord. "The manna," says he,
   "and the water that flowed forth from the rock, served not merely for
   the food of the body, but also for the spiritual nourishment of souls."
   It is true, that both were means of sustenance for the body, but this
   does not hinder their serving also another purpose. While, therefore,
   the Lord relieved the necessities of the body, he, at the same time,
   provided for the everlasting welfare of souls. These two things would
   be easily reconciled, were there not a difficulty presented in Christ's
   words, (John 6:31,) where he makes the manna the corruptible food of
   the belly, which he contrasts with the true food of the soul. That
   statement appears to differ widely from what Paul says here. This knot,
   too, is easily solved. It is the manner of scripture, when treating of
   the sacraments, or other things, to speak in some cases according to
   the capacity of the hearers, and in that case it has respect not to the
   nature of the thing, but to the mistaken idea of the hearers. Thus,
   Paul does not always speak of circumcision in the same way, for when he
   has a view to the appointment of God in it, he says, that it was a seal
   of the righteousness of the faith, (Romans 4:11,) but when he is
   disputing with those who gloried in an outward and bare sign, and
   reposed in it a mistaken confidence of salvation, he says, that it is a
   token of condemnation, because men bind themselves by it to keep the
   whole law (Galatians 5:2, 3.) For he takes merely the opinion that the
   false apostles had of it, because he contends, not against the pure
   institution of God, but against their mistaken view. In this way, as
   the carnal multitude preferred Moses to Christ, because he had fed the
   people in the desert for forty years, and looked to nothing in the
   manna but the food of the belly, (as indeed they sought nothing else,)
   Christ in his reply does not explain what was meant by the manna, but,
   passing over everything else, suits his discourse to the idea
   entertained by his hearers. "Moses is held by you in the highest
   esteem, and even in admiration, as a most eminent Prophet, because he
   filled the bellies of your fathers in the desert. For this one thing
   you object against me: I am accounted nothing by you, because I do not
   supply you with food for the belly. But if you reckon corruptible food
   of so much importance, what ought you to think of the life-giving
   bread, with which souls are nourished up unto eternal life?." We see
   then that the Lord speaks there -- not according to the nature of the
   thing, but rather according to the apprehension of his hearers. [530]
   Paul, on the other hand, looks here -- not to the ordinance of God, but
   to the abuse of it by the wicked.

   Farther, when he says that the fathers ate the same spiritual meat, he
   shows, first, what is the virtue and efficacy of the Sacraments, and,
   secondly, he declares, that the ancient Sacraments of the Law had the
   same virtue as ours have at this day. For, if the manna was spiritual
   food, it follows, that it is not bare emblems that are presented to us
   in the Sacraments, but that the thing represented is at the same time
   truly imparted, for God is not a deceiver to feed us with empty
   fancies. [531] A sign, it is true, is a sign, and retains its essence,
   but, as Papists act a ridiculous part, who dream of transformations, (I
   know not of what sort,) so it is not for us to separate between the
   reality and the emblem which God has conjoined. Papists confound the
   reality and the sign: profane men, as, for example, Suenckfeldius, and
   the like, separate the signs from the realities. Let us maintain a
   middle course, [532] or, in other words, let us observe the connection
   appointed by the Lord, but still keep them distinct, that we may not
   mistakingly transfer to the one what belongs to the other.

   It remains that we speak of the second point -- the resemblance between
   the ancient signs and ours. It is a well-known dogma of the schoolmen
   -- that the Sacraments of the ancient law were emblems of grace, but
   ours confer it. This passage is admirably suited for refuting that
   error, for it shows that the reality of the Sacrament was presented to
   the ancient people of God no less than to us. It is therefore a base
   fancy of the Sorbonists, that the holy fathers under the law had the
   signs without the reality. I grant, indeed, that the efficacy of the
   signs is furnished to us at once more clearly and more abundantly from
   the time of Christ's manifestation in the flesh than it was possessed
   by the fathers. Thus there is a difference between us and them only in
   degree, or, (as they commonly say,) of "more and less," for we receive
   more fully what they received in a smaller measure. It is not as if
   they had had bare emblems, while we enjoy the reality. [533]

   Some explain it to mean, that they [534] ate the same meat together
   among themselves, and do not wish us to understand that there is a
   comparison between us and them; but these do not consider Paul's
   object. For what does he mean to say here, but that the ancient people
   of God were honored with the same benefits with us, and were partakers
   of the same sacraments, that we might not, from confiding in any
   peculiar privilege, imagine that we would be exempted from the
   punishment which they endured? At the same time, I should not be
   prepared to contest the point with any one; I merely state my own
   opinion. In the meantime, I am well aware, what show of reason is
   advanced by those who adopt the opposite interpretation -- that it
   suits best with the similitude made use of immediately before -- that
   all the Israelites had the same race-ground marked out for them, and
   all started from the same point: all entered upon the same course: all
   were partakers of the same hope, but many were shut out from the
   reward. When, however, I take everything attentively into
   consideration, I am not induced by these considerations to give up my
   opinion; for it is not without good reason that the Apostle makes
   mention of two sacraments merely, and, more particularly, baptism. For
   what purpose was this, but to contrast them with us? Unquestionably, if
   he had restricted his comparison to the body of that people, he would
   rather have brought forward circumcision, and other sacraments that
   were better known and more distinguished, but, instead of this, he
   chose rather those that were more obscure, because they served more as
   a contrast between us and them. Nor would the application that he
   subjoins be otherwise so suitable -- "All things that happened to them
   are examples to us, inasmuch as we there see the judgments of God that
   are impending over us, if we involve ourselves in the same crimes."

   4. That rock was Christ Some absurdly pervert these words of Paul, as
   if he had said, that Christ was the spiritual rock, and as if he were
   not speaking of that rock which was a visible sign, for we see that he
   is expressly treating of outward signs. The objection that they make --
   that the rock is spoken of as spiritual, is a frivolous one, inasmuch
   as that epithet is applied to it simply that we may know that it was a
   token of a spiritual mystery. In the mean time, there is no doubt, that
   he compares our sacraments with the ancient ones. Their second
   objection is more foolish and more childish -- "How could a rock," say
   they, "that stood firm in its place, follow the Israelites?" -- as if
   it were not abundantly manifest, that by the word rock is meant the
   stream of water, which never ceased to accompany the people. For Paul
   extols [535] the grace of God, on this account, that he commanded the
   water that was drawn out from the rock to flow forth wherever the
   people journeyed, as if the rock itself had followed them. Now if
   Paul's meaning were, that Christ is the spiritual foundation of the
   Church, what occasion were there for his using the past tense? [536] It
   is abundantly manifest, that something is here expressed that was
   peculiar to the fathers. Away, then, with that foolish fancy by which
   contentious men choose rather to show their impudence, than admit that
   they are sacramental forms of expression! [537]

   I have, however, already stated, that the reality of the things
   signified was exhibited in connection with the ancient sacraments. As,
   therefore, they were emblems of Christ, it follows, that Christ was
   connected with them, not locally, nor by a natural or substantial
   union, but sacramentally. On this principle the Apostle says, that the
   rock was Christ, for nothing is more common than metonymy in speaking
   of sacraments. The name of the thing, therefore, is transferred here to
   the sign -- not as if it were strictly applicable, but figuratively, on
   the ground of that connection which I have mentioned. I touch upon
   this, however, the more slightly, because it will be more largely
   treated of when we come to the [16]11th Chapter.

   There remains another question. "Seeing that we now in the Supper eat
   the body of Christ, and drink his blood, how could the Jews be
   partakers of the same spiritual meat and drink, when there was as yet
   no flesh of Christ that they could eat?" I answer, that though his
   flesh did not as yet exist, it was, nevertheless, food for them. Nor is
   this an empty or sophistical subtilty, for their salvation depended on
   the benefit of his death and resurrection. Hence, they required to
   receive the flesh and the blood of Christ, that they might participate
   in the benefit of redemption. This reception of it was the secret work
   of the Holy Spirit, who wrought in them in such a manner, that Christ's
   flesh, though not yet created, was made efficacious in them. He means,
   however, that they ate in their own way, which was different from ours,
   [538] and this is what I have previously stated, that Christ is now
   presented to us more fully, according to the measure of the revelation.
   For, in the present day, the eating is substantial, which it could not
   have been then -- that is, Christ feeds us with his flesh, which has
   been sacrificed for us, and appointed as our food, and from this we
   derive life.

   5. But many of them. We have now the reason why the Apostle has
   premised these things -- that we might not claim for ourselves any
   dignity or excellence above them, but might walk in humility and fear,
   for thus only shall we secure, that we have not been favored in vain
   with the light of truth, and with such an abundance of gracious
   benefits. "God," says he, "had chosen them all as his people, but many
   of them fell from grace. Let us, therefore, take heed, lest the same
   thing should happen to us, being admonished by so many examples, for
   God will not suffer that to go unpunished in us, which he punished so
   severely in them."

   Here again it is objected: "If it is true, that hypocrites and wicked
   persons in that age ate spiritual meat, do unbelievers in the present
   day partake of the reality in the sacraments?" Some, afraid lest the
   unbelief of men should seem to detract from the truth of God, teach
   that the reality is received by the wicked along with the sign. This
   fear, however, is needless, for the Lord offers, it is true, to the
   worthy and to the unworthy what he represents, but all are not capable
   of receiving it. In the meantime, the sacrament does not change its
   nature, nor does it lose anything of its efficacy. Hence the manna, in
   relation to God, was spiritual meat even to unbelievers, but because
   the mouth of unbelievers was but carnal, they did not eat what was
   given them. The fuller discussion, however, of this question I reserve
   for the 11th Chapter.

   For they were overthrown. Proof is here furnished, by adducing a token,
   that they did not please God -- inasmuch as he exercised his wrath upon
   them with severity, [539] and took vengeance on their ingratitude. Some
   understand this as referring to the whole of the people that died in
   the desert, with the exception of only two -- Caleb and Joshua.
   (Numbers 14:29.) I understand him, however, as referring merely to
   those, whom he immediately afterwards makes mention of in different
   classes.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [520] "Comme feroyent des gendarmes, qui ont desia fidelement serui si
   long temps, que pour leur faire honneur on les enuoye se reposer le
   reste de leur vie;" -- "After the manner of soldiers, who have already
   served with fidelity for so long a time, that with the view of putting
   honor upon them, they were discharged, so as to be exempted from labor
   during the remainder of their life."

   [521] "Aussi bien qu'a nous;" -- "As well as to us."

   [522] "Ils ont senti le jugement de Dieu, et ne l'ont peu euiter;" --
   "They have felt the judgment of God, and have not been able to escape
   it."

   [523] "Eux, qui estoyent son peuple;" -- "Those who were his people."

   [524] "Nous nous assuietissons et bisons serment;" -- "We submit
   ourselves, and make oath."

   [525] "Et terrien;" -- "And earthly."

   [526] "Mystere et secret;" -- "Mystery and secret."

   [527] "Par toute l'Escriture;" -- "Throughout the whole of Scripture.

   [528] "Es Escritures;" -- "In the Scriptures."

   [529] "Nous n'en auons maintenant pas un seul mot en'toute
   l'Escriture;" -- "We have not a single word of it in the whole of
   Scripture."

   [530] See Calvin on John, [17]vol. 1, p. 247. -- Ed.

   [531] "Choses qui ayent apparence sans efibt;" -- "Things that have an
   appearance, without reality."

   [532] "Entre ees deux extremitez;" -- "Between these two extremes."

   [533] Our author, having occasion to refer to the same "Scholastic
   dogma" as to the Sacraments of the Old and New Testaments, (when
   [18]commenting on Romans 4:12,) says, "Illis enim vim justificandi
   adimunt, his attribuunt:" -- "They deny to the former the power of
   justifying, while they assign it to the latter." -- Ed.

   [534] "Les Israelites;" -- "The Israelites."

   [535] "Celebre et magnifie;" -- "Celebrates and extols."

   [536] "Estoit;" -- "Was."

   [537] "C'est a dire, lesquelles il ne faut pendre cruement, et a la
   lettre, comme on dit;" -- "That is to say -- which must not be taken
   strictly or according to the letter, as they say." The reader will find
   this subject handled at some length in the Harmony, [19]vol. 3, pp.
   207,208. -- Ed.

   [538] "D'vnc autre facon et mesure que nous ne faisons pas;" -- "In
   another way and measure than we do."

   [539] "Il a fait une horrible vengence sur eux;" -- "He inflicted
   dreadful vengeance upon them."
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 10:6-12

   6. Now these things were our examples, to the intent we should not lust
   after evil things, as they also lusted.

   6. Haec autem typi nobis fuerunt, ne simus concupiscentes malorum,
   sicut illi concupiverunt.

   7. Neither be ye idolaters, as were some of them; as it is written, The
   people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play.

   7. Neque idololatrae sitis, quemadmodum quidam eorum: sicut scriptum
   est. (Exodus 32:6.) Sedit populus ad edendum et bibendum, et
   surrexerunt ad ludendum.

   8. Neither let us commit fornication, as some of them committed, and
   fell in one day three and twenty thousand.

   8. Neque scortemur, quemadmodum et quidam eorum scortati sunt, et
   ceciderunt uno die viginti tria millia.

   9. Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted, and were
   destroyed of serpents.

   9. Neque tentemus Christum, quemadmodum et quidam eorum tentarunt, et
   exstincti sunt a serpentibus.

   10. Neither murmur ye, as some of them also murmured, and were
   destroyed of the destroyer.

   10. Neque murmuretis, quemadmodum et quidam eorum murmurarant, et
   perditi ruerunt a vastatore.

   11. Now all these things happened unto them for ensamples: and they are
   written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come.

   11. Haec autem omnia typi contigerunt illis: scripta autem sunt ad
   nostri admonitionem, in quos fines saeculorum inciderunt.

   12. Wherefore let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall.

   12. Proinde qui se putat stare, videat ne cadat.


   6. Now these things were types to us. He warns us in still more
   explicit terms, that we have to do with the punishment that was
   inflicted upon them, so that they are a lesson to us, that we may not
   provoke the anger of God as they did. "God," says he, "in punishing
   them has set before us, as in a picture, his severity, that, instructed
   by their example, we may learn to fear." Of the term type I shall speak
   presently. Only for the present I should wish my readers to know, that
   it is not without consideration that I have given a different rendering
   from that of the old translation, [540] and of Erasmus. For they
   obscure Paul's meaning, or at least they do not bring out with
   sufficient clearness this idea -- that God has in that people presented
   a picture for our instruction.

   That we might not lust after evil things. He now enumerates particular
   instances, or certain examples, that he may take occasion from this to
   reprove some vices, as to which it was proper that the Corinthians
   should be admonished. I am of opinion, that the history that is here
   referred to is what is recorded in Numbers 11:4, etc., though others
   refer it to what is recorded in Numbers 26:64. The people, after having
   been for some time fed with manna, at length took a dislike to it, and
   began to desire other kinds of food, which they had been accustomed to
   partake of in Egypt. Now they sinned in two ways, for they despised the
   peculiar gift of God, and they eagerly longed after a variety of meats
   and delicacies, contrary to the will of God. The Lord, provoked by this
   lawless appetite, inflicted upon the people a grievous blow. Hence the
   place was called the

   graves of lust, [541] because there they buried those whom
   the Lord had smitten. (Numbers 11:34.)

   The Lord by this example testified how much he hates those lusts that
   arise from dislike of his gifts, and from our lawless appetite, for
   whatever goes beyond the measure that God has prescribed is justly
   reckoned evil and unlawful.

   7. Neither be ye idolaters He touches upon the history that is recorded
   in Exodus 32:7, etc. For when Moses made a longer stay upon the
   mountain than the unseemly fickleness of the people could endure, Aaron
   was constrained to make a calf, and set it up as an object of worship.
   Not that the people wished to change their God, but rather to have some
   visible token of God's presence, in accordance with their carnal
   apprehension. God, in punishing at that time this idolatry with the
   greatest severity, showed by that example how much he abhors idolatry.

   As it is written, The people sat down This passage is rightly
   interpreted by few, for they understand intemperance among the people
   to have been the occasion of wantonness, [542] in accordance with the
   common proverb, "Dancing comes after a full diet." [543] But Moses
   speaks of a sacred feast, or in other words, what they celebrated in
   honor of the idol. Hence feasting and play were two appendages of
   idolatry. For it was customary, both among the people of Israel and
   among the rotaries of superstition, to have a feast in connection with
   a sacrifice, as a part of divine worship, at which no profane or
   unclean persons were allowed to be present. The Gentiles, in addition
   to this, appointed sacred games in honor of their idols, in conformity
   with which the Israelites doubtless on that occasion worshipped their
   calf, [544] for such is the presumption of the human mind, that it
   ascribes to God whatever pleases itself. Hence the Gentiles have fallen
   into such a depth of infatuation as to believe, that their gods are
   delighted with the basest spectacles, immodest dances, impurity of
   speech, and every kind of obscenity. Hence in imitation of them the
   Israelitish people, having observed their sacred banquet, rose up to
   celebrate the games, that nothing might be wanting in honor of the
   idol. This is the true and simple meaning.

   But here it is asked, why the Apostle makes mention of the feast and
   the games, rather than of adoration, for this is the chief thing in
   idolatry, while the other two things were merely appendages. The reason
   is, that he has selected what best suited the case of the Corinthians.
   For it is not likely, that they frequented the assemblies of the
   wicked, for the purpose of prostrating themselves before the idols, but
   partook of their feasts, held in honor of their deities, and did not
   keep at a distance from those base ceremonies, which were tokens of
   idolatry. It is not therefore without good reason that the Apostle
   declares, that their particular form of offense is expressly condemned
   by God. He intimates, in short, that no part of idolatry [545] can be
   touched without contracting pollution, and that those will not escape
   punishment from the hand of God, who defile themselves with the outward
   tokens of idolatry.

   8. Neither let us commit fornication Now he speaks of fornication, in
   respect of which, as appears from historical accounts, great
   licentiousness prevailed among the Corinthians, and we may readily
   infer from what goes before, that those who had professed themselves to
   be Christ's were not yet altogether free from this vice. The punishment
   of this vice, also, ought to alarm us, and lead us to bear in mind, how
   loathsome impure lusts are to God, for there perished in one day
   twenty-three thousand, or as Moses says, twenty-four. Though they
   differ as to number, it is easy to reconcile them, as it is no unusual
   thing, when it is not intended to number exactly and minutely each
   head, [546] to put down a number that comes near it, as among the
   Romans there were those that received the name of Centumviri, [547]
   (The Hundred,) while in reality there were two above the hundred. As
   there were, therefore, about twenty-four thousand that were overthrown
   by the Lord's hand -- that is, above twenty-three, Moses has set down
   the number above the mark, and Paul, the number below it, and in this
   way there is in reality no difference. This history is recorded in
   Numbers 25:9

   There remains, however, one difficulty here -- why it is that Paul
   attributes this punishment to fornication, while Moses relates that the
   anger of God was aroused against the people on this account -- that
   they had initiated themselves in the sacred rites of Baalpeor. [548]
   But as the defection began with fornication, and the children of Israel
   fell into that impiety, not so much from being influenced by religious
   considerations, [549] as from being allured by the enticements of
   harlots, everything evil that followed from it ought to be attributed
   to fornication. For Balaam had given this counsel, that the Midianites
   should prostitute their daughters to the Israelites, with the view of
   estranging them from the true worship of God. Nay more, their excessive
   blindness, in allowing themselves to be drawn into impiety [550] by the
   enticements of harlots, was the punishment of lust. Let us learn,
   accordingly, that fornication is no light offense, which was punished
   on that occasion by God so severely and indeed in a variety of ways.

   9. Neither let us tempt Christ This part of the exhortation refers to
   the history that is recorded in Numbers 21:6. For the people, having
   become weary of the length of time, began to complain of their
   condition, and to expostulate with God -- "Why has God deceived us,"
   etc. This murmuring of the people Paul speaks of as a tempting; and not
   without good reason, for tempting is opposed to patience. What reason
   was there at that time why the people should rise up against God,
   except this -- that, under the influence of base desire, [551] they
   could not wait in patience the arrival of the time appointed by the
   Lord? Let us, therefore, take notice, that the fountain of that evil
   against which Paul here warns us is impatience, when we wish to go
   before God, and do not give ourselves up to be ruled by Him, but rather
   wish to bind him to our inclination and laws. This evil God severely
   punished in the Israelitish people. Now he remains always like himself
   -- a just Judge. Let us therefore not tempt him, if we would not have
   experience of the same punishment.

   This is a remarkable passage in proof of the eternity of Christ; for
   the cavil of Erasmus has no force -- "Let us not tempt Christ, as some
   of them tempted God;" for to supply the word God is extremely forced.
   [552] Nor is it to be wondered that Christ is called the Leader of the
   Israelitish people. For as God was never propitious to his people
   except through that Mediator, so he conferred no benefit except through
   his hand. Farther, the angel who appeared at first to Moses, and was
   always present with the people during their journeying, is frequently
   called yhvh, Jehovah. [553] Let us then regard it as a settled point,
   that that angel was the Son of God, and was even then the guide of the
   Church of which he was the Head. As to the term Christ, from its having
   a signification that corresponds with his human nature, it was not as
   yet applicable to the Son of God, but it is assigned to him by the
   communication of properties, as we read elsewhere, that

   the Son of Man came down from heaven. (John 3:13.)

   10. Neither murmur ye Others understand this to be the murmuring that
   arose, when the twelve, who had been sent to spy out the land,
   disheartened, on their return, the minds of the people. But as that
   murmuring was not punished suddenly by any special chastisement from
   the Lord, but was simply followed by the infliction of this punishment
   -- that all were excluded from the possession of the land, it is
   necessary to explain this passage otherwise. It was a most severe
   punishment, it is true, to be shut out from entering the land, [554]
   but the words of Paul, when he says that they were destroyed by the
   destroyer, express another kind of chastisement. I refer it,
   accordingly, to the history, which is recorded in the sixteenth chapter
   of Numbers. [Nu 16:1-50]. For when God had punished the pride of Korah
   and Abiram, the people raised a tumult against Moses and Aaron, as if
   they had been to blame for the punishment which the Lord had inflicted.
   This madness of the people God punished by sending down fire from
   heaven, which swallowed up many of them -- upwards of fourteen
   thousand. It is, therefore, a striking and memorable token of God's
   wrath against rebels and seditious persons, that murmur against him.

   Those persons, it is true, murmured against Moses; but as they had no
   ground for insulting him, and had no occasion for being incensed
   against him, unless it was that he had faithfully discharged the duty
   which had been enjoined upon him by God, God himself was assailed by
   that murmuring. Let us, accordingly, bear in mind that we have to do
   with God, and not with men, if we rise up against the faithful
   ministers of God, and let us know that this audacity [555] will not go
   unpunished.

   By the destroyer you may understand the Angel, who executed the
   judgment of God. Now he sometimes employs the ministry of bad angels,
   sometimes of good, in punishing men, as appears from various passages
   of Scripture. As Paul here does not make a distinction between the one
   and the other, you may understand it of either.

   11. Now all these things happened as types. He again repeats it -- that
   all these things happened to the Israelites, that they might be types
   to us -- that is, examples, in which God places his judgments before
   our eyes I am well aware, that others philosophize on these words with
   great refinement, but I think that I have fully expressed the Apostle's
   meaning, when I say, that by these examples, like so many pictures, we
   are instructed what judgments of God are impending over idolaters,
   fornicators, and other contemners of God. For they are lively pictures,
   representing God as angry on account of such sins. This exposition,
   besides being simple and accurate, has this additional advantage, that
   it blocks up the path of certain madmen, [556] who wrest this passage
   for the purpose of proving, that among that ancient people there was
   nothing done but what was shadowy. First of all, they assume that that
   people is a figure of the Church. From this they infer, that everything
   that God promised to them, or accomplished for them -- all benefits,
   all punishments, [557] only prefigured what required to be accomplished
   in reality after Christ's advent. This is a most pestilential frenzy,
   which does great injury to the holy fathers, and much greater still to
   God. For that people was a figure of the Christian Church, in such a
   manner as to be at the same time a true Church. Their condition
   represented ours in such a manner that there was at the same time, even
   then, a proper condition of a Church. The promises given to them
   shadowed forth the gospel in such a way, that they had it included in
   them. Their sacraments served to prefigure ours in such a way, that
   they were nevertheless, even for that period, true sacraments, having a
   present efficacy. In fine, those who at that time made a right use,
   both of doctrine, and of signs, were endowed with the same spirit of
   faith as we are. These madmen, therefore, derive no support from these
   words of Paul, which do not mean that the things that were done in that
   age were types, in such a way as to have at that time no reality, but a
   mere empty show. Nay more, they expressly teach us, (as we have
   explained,) that those things which may be of use for our admonition,
   are there set forth before us, as in a picture.

   They are written for our admonition This second clause is explanatory
   of the former; for it was of no importance to the Israelites, but to us
   exclusively, that these things should be committed to record. [558] It
   does not, however, follow from this, that these inflictions were not
   true chastisements from God, suited for their correction at that time,
   but as God then inflicted his judgments, so he designed that they
   should be kept everlastingly in remembrance for our instruction. For of
   what advantage were the history of them to the dead; and as to the
   living, how would it be of advantage to them, unless they repented,
   admonished by the examples of others? Now he takes for granted the
   principle, as to which all pious persons ought to be agreed -- that
   there is nothing revealed in the Scriptures, that is not profitable to
   be known.

   Upon whom the ends of the world are come The word tele (ends) sometimes
   means mysteries; [559] and that signification would not suit in with
   this passage. I follow, however, the common rendering, as being more
   simple. He says then, that the ends of all ages are come upon us,
   inasmuch as the fullness of all things is suitable to this age, because
   it is now the last times. For the kingdom of Christ is the main object
   of the Law and of all the Prophets. But this statement of Paul is at
   variance with the common opinion -- that God, while more severe under
   the Old Testament, and always ready and armed for the punishment of
   crimes, has now begun to be exorable, and more ready to forgive. They
   explain, also, our being under the law of grace, in this sense -- that
   we have God more placable than the ancients had. But what says Paul? If
   God inflicted punishment upon them, he will not the more spare you.
   Away, then, with the error, that God is now more remiss in exacting the
   punishment of crimes! It must, indeed, be acknowledged, that, by the
   advent of Christ, God's goodness has been more openly and more
   abundantly poured forth towards men; but what has this to do with
   impunity for the abandoned, who abuse his grace? [560]

   This one thing only must be noticed, that in the present day the mode
   of punishment is different; for as God of old was more prepared to
   reward the pious with outward tokens of his blessing, that he might
   testify to them his fatherly love, so he showed his wrath more by
   corporal punishments. Now, on the other hand, in that fuller revelation
   which we enjoy, he does not so frequently inflict visible punishments,
   and does not so frequently inflict corporal punishment even upon the
   wicked. You will find more on this subject in my Institutes. [561]

   12. Wherefore let him that thinketh he standeth The Apostle concludes
   from what goes before, that we must not glory in our beginnings or
   progress, so as to resign ourselves to carelessness and inactivity.
   [562] For the Corinthians gloried in their condition in such a way,
   that, forgetting their weakness, they fell into many crimes. This was a
   false confidence of such a kind as the Prophets frequently reprove in
   the Israelitish people. As, however, Papists wrest this passage for the
   purpose of maintaining their impious doctrine respecting faith, as
   having constantly doubt connected with it, [563] let us observe that
   there are two kinds of assurance.

   The one is that which rests on the promises of God, because a pious
   conscience feels assured that God will never be wanting to it; and,
   relying on this unconquerable persuasion, triumphs boldly and
   intrepidly over Satan and sin, and yet, nevertheless, keeping in mind
   its own infirmity, casts itself [564] upon God, and with carefulness
   and anxiety commits itself to him. This kind of assurance is sacred,
   and is inseparable from faith, as appears from many passages of
   Scripture, and especially Romans 8:33.

   The other arises from negligence, when men, puffed up with the gifts
   that they have, give themselves no concern, as if they were beyond the
   reach of danger, but rest satisfied with their condition. Hence it is
   that they are exposed to all the assaults of Satan. This is the kind of
   assurance which Paul would have the Corinthians to abandon, because he
   saw that they were satisfied with themselves under the influence of a
   silly conceit. He does not, however, exhort them to be always anxiously
   in doubt as to the will of God, or to tremble from uncertainty as to
   their salvation, as Papists dream. [565] In short, let us bear in mind,
   that Paul is here addressing persons who were puffed up with a base
   confidence in the flesh, and represses that assurance which is grounded
   upon men -- not upon God. For after commending the Colossians for the
   solidity or steadfastness of their faith, (Colossians 2:5,) he exhorts
   them to be

   rooted in Christ, to remain firm, and to be built up and
   confirmed in the faith. (Colossians 2:7.)
     __________________________________________________________________

   [540] The rendering of the Vulgate is -- in figura -- (in figure.)
   Wiclif (1380) reads the clause thus: "But these thingis ben don in
   figure of us." -- Ed.

   [541] Our Author gives here the literal meaning of Kibroth-hatta-avah.
   -- Ed.

   [542] "Et esgayement desborde;" -- "And unbridled excess."

   [543] "Apres la panse vient la danse;" -- "After dinner comes the
   dance."

   [544] "Et ne faut point douter que les Israelites n'ayent pour lots
   adore leur veau auec telle ceremonie et obseruation que les Gentils
   faisoyent leurs idoles;" -- "And we cannot doubt, that the Israelites
   on that occasion adored their calf with the same ceremony and care as
   the Gentiles did their idols.

   [545] "Tant petite soit elle;" -- "Be it ever so little."

   [546] "De faire vn denombrement entier des personnes par testes, comme
   on dit;" -- "To make a complete enumeration of persons by heads, as
   they say."

   [547] "Les juges qui estoyent deputez pour cognoistre des matieres
   ciuiles, estoyent nommez les cent, et toutes lois il yen auoit deux par
   dessus;" -- "The judges who were deputed to take cognizance of civil
   matters were called The Hundred, and yet there were two above the
   hundred." As the Centumviri were chosen out of the thirty-five tribes,
   into which the Roman people were divided, three from each tribe, they
   consisted properly of 105 persons. -- Ed.

   [548] "Auoit sacrifie a Baalpheor;" -- "Had sacrificed to Baalpeor."

   [549] "Non pas tant pour affection qu'ils eussent a la fausse
   religion;" -- "Not so much from any attachment that they had to a false
   religion."

   [550] "Vne impiete si vileine;" -- "An impiety so base."

   [551] "Vn desir importun et desordonne;" -- "An importunate and
   inordinate desire."

   [552] Billroth, in his'Commentary on the Epistles to the Corinthians,
   alleges, that the view that is here taken by Calvin "could have been
   suggested only by reasons of a dogmarital character." The objection
   thus brought forward, however, is satisfactorily set aside in a
   valuable note by Dr. Alexander, in his translation of Billroth. See
   Biblical Cabinet, No. 21, pp. 246, 247. See also Henderson on
   Inspiration, pp. 553, 554. -- Ed.

   [553] "C'est a dire, l'Eternel;" -- "That is to say, the Eternal."

   [554] "De n'entrer point en la iouissance de la terre promise;" -- "Not
   to enter on the enjoyment of the promised land."

   [555] "Ceste temerite outrecuidee;" -- "This presumptuous rashness."

   [556] "Elle ferme la bouche a vn tas d'enragez;" -- "It shuts the mouth
   of a troop of madmen."

   [557] "Qui leur sont aduenues;" -- "Which happened to them."

   [558] "Car quant aux Israelites qui viuoyent lors, il n'estoit point
   requis que ces choses firssent enregistrees et mises par escrit, mais
   seulement pour nous;" -- For in so far as concerned the Israelites who
   lived at that time, it was not requisite that these things should be
   recorded and committed to writing, but solely on our account."

   [559] The term is applied in this sense, more especially to the
   Eleusinian mysteries, which were called ta megala tele -- the great
   mysteries Plat. Rep. 560 E. See also Eurip. Med. 1379. -- Ed

   [560] "Dequoy sert cela pour prouuer que les meschans, et ceux qui
   abusent de la grace de Dieu demeureront impunis?" -- "Of what use is
   this for proving that the wicked, and those that abuse the grace of
   God, will go unpunished?"

   [561] Our Author probably refers more particularly to that part of the
   Institutes in which he states the points of difference between the Old
   and the New Testaments. See Institutes, volume 1, pp. 525-529. -- Ed.

   [562] "Que nous-nous endormions comme gens asseurez, et sans grand
   soin;" -- "That we should resign ourselves to sleep, as persons who are
   confident, and without much care."

   [563] "Par laquelle ils disent qu'il nous faut tousiours douter de la
   foy;" -- "By which they say that we must always doubt as to faith."

   [564] "Se Remet du tout;" -- "Commits itself wholly."

   [565] The reader will observe that our Author has already touched upon
   this subject at some length, when [20]commenting on chapter 2:12. --
   Ed.
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 10:13-18

   13. There hath no temptation taken you but such as is common to man:
   but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that
   ye are able; but will with the temptation also make a way to escape,
   that ye may be able to bear it

   13. Tentatio vos non apprehendit nisi humana. Fidelis autem Deus, qui
   non sinet vos tentari supra quam potestis: sed dabit una cum tentatione
   etiam exitum, ut possitis sustinere.

   14. Wherefore, my dearly beloved, flee from idolatry.

   14. Quapropter, dilecti mei, fu gite ab idololatria.

   15. I speak as to wise men; judge ye what I say.

   15. Tanquam prudentibus loquor: iudicate ipsi quod dico.

   16. The cup of blessing, which we bless, is it not the communion of the
   blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of
   the body of Christ?

   16. Calix benedictionis, cui bene dicimus, nonne communicatio est
   sanguinis Christi? panis, quem fran gimus, nonne communicatio est cor
   ports Christi?

   17. For we being many are one bread, and one body: for we are all
   partakers of that one bread.

   17. Quoniam unus panis, unum corpus multi sumus: omnes enim de uno pane
   participamus.

   18. Behold Israel after the flesh: are not they which eat of the
   sacrifices partakers of the altar?

   18. Videte Israel secundum car nem: nonne qui edunt hostias, altari
   communicant?


   13. No temptation has taken you. [566] Let others take their own way of
   interpreting this. For my part, I am of opinion that it was intended
   for their consolation, lest on hearing of such appalling instances of
   the wrath of God, as he had previously related, they should feel
   discouraged, being overpowered with alarm. Hence, in order that his
   exhortation might be of advantage, he adds, that there is room for
   repentance. "There is no reason why you should despond; for I have not
   had it in view to give you occasion for despair, nor has anything
   happened to you but what is common to men." Others are of opinion that
   he rather chides their cowardice in giving way, on being so slightly
   tried; [567] and unquestionably the word rendered human is sometimes
   taken to mean moderate. [568] The meaning, then, according to them
   would be this: "Did it become you thus to give way under a slight
   trial?" But as it agrees better with the context, if we consider it as
   consolation, I am on this account rather inclined to that view.

   But God is faithful As he exhorted them to be of good courage as to the
   past, in order that he might stir them up to repentance, so he also
   comforts them as to the future with a sure hope, on the ground that God
   would not suffer them to be tempted beyond their strength. He exhorts
   them, however, to look to the Lord, because a temptation, however
   slight it may be, will straightway overcome us, and all will be over
   with us, if we rely upon our own strength. He speaks of the Lord, as
   faithful, not merely as being true to his promises, but as though he
   had said. The Lord is the sure guardian of his people, under whose
   protection you are safe, for he never leaves his people destitute.
   Accordingly, when he has received you under his protection, you have no
   cause to fear, provided you depend entirely upon him. For certainly
   this were a species of deception, if he were to withdraw his aid in the
   time of need, or if he were, on seeing us weak and ready to sink under
   the load, to lengthen out our trials still farther. [569]

   Now God helps us in two ways, that we may not be overcome by the
   temptation; for he supplies us with strength, and he sets limits to the
   temptation. It is of the second of these ways that the Apostle here
   chiefly speaks. At the same time, he does not exclude the former --
   that God alleviates temptations, that they may not overpower us by
   their weight. For he knows the measure of our power, which he has
   himself conferred. According to that, he regulates our temptations. The
   term temptation I take here as denoting, in a general way, everything
   that allures us.

   14. Wherefore, my beloved, flee, etc. The Apostle now returns to the
   particular question, from which he had for a little digressed, for,
   lest bare doctrine should have little effect among them, he has
   introduced those general exhortations that we have read, but now he
   pursues the discussion on which he had entered -- that it is not
   allowable for a Christian man to connect himself with the superstitions
   of the wicked, so as to take part in them. Flee, says he, from idolatry
   In the first place, let us observe what meaning he attaches to the term
   Idolatry He certainly did not suspect the Corinthians of such a degree
   of ignorance or carelessness [570] as to think, that they worshipped
   idols in their heart. But as they made no scruple of frequenting the
   assemblies of the wicked, and observing along with them certain rites
   instituted in honor of idols, he condemns this liberty taken by them,
   as being a very bad example. It is certain, then, that when he here
   makes mention of idolatry, he, speaks of what is outward, or, if you
   prefer it, of the profession [571] of idolatry. For as God is said to
   be worshipped by the bending of the knee, and other tokens of
   reverence, while the principal and genuine worship of him is inward, so
   is it also as to idols, for the case holds the same in things opposite.
   It is to no purpose that very many in the present day endeavor to
   excuse outward actions [572] on this pretext, that the heart is not in
   them, while Paul convicts of idolatry those very acts, and assuredly
   with good reason. For, as we owe to God not merely the secret affection
   of the heart, but also outward adoration, the man who offers to an idol
   an appearance of adoration takes away so much of the honor due to God.
   Let him allege as he may that his heart is quite away from it. The
   action itself is to be seen, in which the honor that is due to God is
   transferred to an idol.

   15. I speak as to wise men. As he was about to take his argument from
   the mystery of the Supper, he arouses them by this little preface, that
   they may consider more attentively the magnitude of the thing. [573] "I
   do not address mere novices. You understand the efficacy of the sacred
   Supper in it we are ingrafted into the Lord's body. How unseemly a
   thing is it then, that you should enter into fellowship with the
   wicked, so as to be united in one body. At the same time, he tacitly
   reproves their want of consideration in this respect, that, while
   accurately instructed in the school of Christ, they allowed themselves
   in gross vice, as to which there was no difficulty in forming an
   opinion.

   16. The cup of blessing While the sacred Supper of Christ has two
   elements -- bread and wine -- he begins with the second. He calls it,
   the cup of blessing, as having been set apart for a mystical
   benediction. [574] For I do not agree with those who understand
   blessing to mean thanksgiving, and interpret the verb to bless, as
   meaning to give thanks I acknowledge, indeed, that it is sometimes
   employed in this sense, but never in the construction that Paul has
   here made use of, for the idea of Erasmus, as to supplying a
   preposition, [575] is exceedingly forced. On the other hand, the
   meaning that I adopt is easy, and has nothing of intricacy.

   To bless the cup, then, is to set it apart for this purpose, that it
   may be to us an emblem of the blood of Christ. This is done by the word
   of promise, when believers meet together according to Christ's
   appointment to celebrate the remembrance of his death in this
   Sacrament. The consecration, however, which the Papists make use of, is
   a kind of sorcery derived from heathens, [576] which has nothing in
   common with the pure rite observed by Christians. Everything, it is
   true, that we eat is sanctified by the word of God, as Paul himself
   elsewhere bears witness, (1 Timothy 4:5;) but that blessing is for a
   different purpose -- that our use of the gifts of God may be pure, and
   may tend to the glory of their Author, and to our advantage. On the
   other hand, the design of the mystical blessing in the Supper is, that
   the wine may be no longer a common beverage, but set apart for the
   spiritual nourishment of the soul, while it is an emblem of the blood
   of Christ.

   Paul says, that the cup which has been in this manner blessed is
   koinonian -- the comnunion of the blood of the Lord. It is asked, in
   what sense? Let contention be avoided, and there will be nothing of
   obscurity. It is true, that believers are united together by Christ's
   blood, so as to become one body. It is also true, that a unity of this
   kind is with propriety termed koinonia (communion.) I make the same
   acknowledgment as to the bread Farther, I observe what Paul immediately
   adds, as it were, by way of explanation -- that we all become one body,
   because we are together partakers of the same bread But whence, I pray
   you, comes that koinonia (communion) between us, but from this, that we
   are united to Christ in such a way, that

   we are flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones?
   (Ephesians 5:30.)

   For we must first of all be incorporated (so to speak) into Christ,
   that we may be united to each other. In addition to this, Paul is not
   disputing at present merely in reference to a mutual fellowship among
   men, but as to the spiritual union between Christ and believers, with
   the view of drawing from this, that it is an intolerable sacrilege for
   them to be polluted by fellowship with idols. From the connection of
   the passage, therefore, we may conclude, that (koinonian) the communion
   of the blood is that connection which we have with the blood of Christ,
   when he engrafts all of us together into his body, that he may live in
   us, and we in him.

   Now, when the cup is called a participation, the expression, I
   acknowledge, is figurative, provided that the truth held forth in the
   figure is not taken away, or, in other words, provided that the reality
   itself is also present, and that the soul has as truly communion in the
   blood, as we drink wine with the mouth. But Papists could not say this,
   that the cup of blessing is a participation in the blood of Christ, for
   the Supper that they observe is mutilated and torn: if indeed we can
   give the name of the Supper to that strange ceremony which is a
   patchwork of various human contrivances, and scarcely retains the
   slightest vestige of the institution of our Lord. But, supposing that
   everything else were as it ought to be, this one thing is at variance
   with the right use of the Supper -- the keeping back of the whole of
   the people from partaking of the cup, which is the half of the
   Sacrament.

   The bread which we break From this it appears, that it was the custom
   of the ancient Church to break one loaf, and distribute to every one
   his own morsel, in order that there might be presented more clearly to
   the view of all believers their union to the one body of Christ. And
   that this custom was long kept up appears from the testimony of those
   who flourished in the three centuries that succeeded the age of the
   Apostles. Hence arose the superstition, that no one dared to touch the
   bread with his hand, but each one had it put into his mouth by the
   priest.

   17. For we are one bread. I have already stated above, that it was not
   Paul's particular design here to exhort us to love, but he mentions
   this by the way, that the Corinthians may understand that we must, even
   by external profession, maintain that unity which subsists between us
   and Christ, inasmuch as we all assemble together to receive the symbol
   of that sacred unity. In this second part of the statement, he makes
   mention only of the one part of the Sacrament, and it is the manner of
   Scripture to describe by Synecdoche [577] the entire Supper by the
   breaking of bread It is necessary to warn my readers, in passing, as to
   this, lest any less experienced person should be put off his guard by
   the foolish cavil that is brought forward by certain sycophants -- as
   if Paul, by mentioning merely the bread, had it in view to deprive the
   people of the one half of the Sacrament.

   18. Behold Israel after the flesh He establishes it by another example,
   that such is the nature of all sacred observances, that they bind us in
   a kind of fellowship with God. For the law of Moses admits no one to a
   feast upon a sacrifice, but the man who has duly prepared himself. I
   speak not of priests merely, but of those among the common people who
   eat of the remains of the sacrifice. Hence it follows, that all who eat
   of the flesh of the sacrificed victim, are partakers with the altar,
   that is, of the sanctification, with which God has set apart his
   Temple, and the sacred rites that are performed in it.

   This expression after the flesh, may seem to be added in order that the
   Corinthians, on comparing the two, might set a higher value on the
   efficacy of our Supper. "If there was so much virtue in the ancient
   figures and in those rudiments of youthful education, how much more
   must we reckon that there is in our mysteries, in which God shines
   forth much more fully upon us!" At the same time, it is more simple, in
   my opinion, to say that Paul intended merely by this mark to
   distinguish the Jews that were still under the law from those that had
   been converted to Christ. Now there was a contrast that remained to be
   made -- that if the sacred rites appointed by God sanctify those who
   observe them, pollution, on the other hand, is contracted from the
   sacred rites rendered to idols. [578] For it is God alone that
   sanctifies, and hence all strange gods pollute. [579] Again, if
   mysteries [580] unite and connect believers with God, it follows, that
   the wicked are in like manner introduced by their superstitious rites
   into fellowship [581] with idols. But the Apostle, before proceeding to
   this, answers by an anthypophora [582] (anticipation) a question that
   might be proposed by way of objection.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [566] "Tentation ne vous a point saisis, ou surprins;" -- "No
   temptation has taken, or overtaken you."

   [567] "Pour si petites et legeres tentations;" -- "On so small and
   light trials."

   [568] The word anthropinos (human) may be understood here to mean --
   proportioned to man's strength, or suited to, man's weakness It is
   rendered in Tyndale's version, and also in Cranmer's: "Soche as
   followeth the nature of man." Most interpreters understand in a similar
   sense an expression which occurs in 2 Samuel 7:14 -- the rod of men,
   and stripes of the children of men. -- Ed

   [569] Mr. Fuller of Kettering, when comparing 1 Corinthians 10:13, with
   2 Corinthians 1:8, justly observes: "The ability in the former of these
   passages, and the strength in the latter, are far from being the same.
   The one is expressive of that divine support which the Lord has
   promised to give to his servants under all their trials: the other, of
   the power which we possess naturally as creatures. We may be tried
   beyond this, as all the martyrs have been, and yet not beyond the
   other. The outward man may perish, while the inward man is renewed day
   by day." -- Fuller's Works, volume 3, p. 609. -- Ed.

   [570] "Tant despourueus de sens et cognoissance de Dieu;" -- "So devoid
   of judgment and knowledge of God."

   [571] "La profession et demonstrance;" -- "The profession and display."

   [572] "Les actes ou gestes externes d'idolatrie;" -- "The outward acts
   or gestures of idolatry.'

   [573] "L'excellence de ce mystere;" -- "The excellence of this
   mystery."

   [574] "A la consecration mystique" -- "For a mystical consecration."

   [575] "Qu'on supplee Pour;" -- "That for should be supplied." The
   original words ho eulogoumen, are supposed by many eminent interpreters
   to be instead of kath ' ho eulogoumen ton Theon -- for which we give
   thanks to God. -- Ed

   [576] The reader will find this subject more largely dwelt upon in the
   Harmony, [21]vol. 3, p. 206. -- Ed.

   [577] A figure of speech in which a part is put for the whole. -- Ed.

   [578] "Des saerifiees et autres eeremonies des idoles;" -- "Sacrifices
   and other ceremonies rendered to idols."

   [579] "Rendent profanes ceux qui les seruent;" -- "Render profane those
   who serve them."

   [580] "Les sacremens;" -- "The sacraments."

   [581] "Vne conionetion et union auec leurs idoles;" -- "A connection
   and union with their idols."

   [582] Anthypophora (anthupophora) is a figure of speech, by which a
   speaker anticipates the objections of his opponent, and answers them.
   -- Ed
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 10:19-24

   19. What say I then? that the idol is any thing, or that which is
   offered in sacrifice to idols is any thing?

   19. Quid ergo dieo? idolum, aliquid esse? aut idolo immolatum, aliquid
   esse?

   20. But I say, that the things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they
   sacrifice to devils, and not to God: and I would not that ye should
   have fellowship with devils.

   20. Sed quae immolant Gentes, daemoniis immolant, non Deo: nolo autem
   vos participes fieri daemoniorum.

   21. Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of devils: ye
   cannot be partakers of the Lord's table, and of the table of devils.

   21. Non potestis calicem Domini bibere, et calicem daemoniorum: non
   potestis mensae Domini communicare, et mensae daemoniorum.

   22. Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger than he?

   22. An provocamus Dominum? numquid fortiores illo sumus?

   23. All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient: all
   things are lawful for me, but all things edify not.

   23. Omnia mihi licent, sed non omnia conducunt: omnia mihi licent, at
   non omnia aedificant.

   24. Let no man seek his own, but every man another's wealth

   24. Nemo quod suum est quaerat, sed quisque quod alterius est.


   19. What do I say then? It might seem at first view as if the Apostle
   either argued inconclusively, or ascribed to idols something of
   existence and of power. Now it might readily be objected -- "What
   comparison is there between the living God and idols? God connects us
   with himself by the sacraments. Be it so. How comes it that idols,
   which are nothing, (1 Corinthians 8:4,) have so much power, as to be
   able to do the like? Do you think that idols are anything, or can do
   anything?" He answers, that he does not look to the idols themselves;
   [583] but rather has in view the intention of those who sacrifice to
   idols. For that was the source of the pollution that he had indirectly
   pointed out. He confesses, therefore, that an idol is nothing. He
   confesses that it is a mere delusion when the Gentiles take it upon
   them to go through solemn rites of dedication, [584] and that the
   creatures of God are not polluted by such fooleries. But as the design
   of them is superstitious and condemnable, and as the work is base, he
   infers, that all who connect themselves with them as associates, are
   involved in pollution.

   20. But the things [585] that the Gentiles sacrifice. To complete the
   answer, a negative must be understood in this way: "I do not say that
   an idol is anything, nor do I imagine it to be endued with any virtue,
   but I say that the Gentiles sacrifice to the devil and not to gods
   those things which they do sacrifice, and hence I estimate the work by
   their wicked and impious superstition. For we must always look to the
   intention with which a thing is done. He, then, who connects himself
   with them, declares that he has fellowship with them in the same
   impiety." He proceeds accordingly with what he had commenced: "If we
   had to do with God only, those things would be nothing, but, in
   relation to men, they become faulty; because no one sits down to an
   idol feast, who does not declare himself to be a worshipper of the
   idol."

   Some, however, understand the term demons here as meaning the imaginary
   deities of the Gentiles, agreeably to their common way of speaking of
   them; for when they speak of demons they meant inferior deities, as,
   for example, heroes, [586] and thus the term was taken in a good sense.
   Plato, in a variety of instances, employs the term to denote genii, or
   angels. [587] That meaning, however, would be quite foreign to Paul's
   design, for his object is to show that it is no light offense to have
   to do with actions that have any appearance of putting honor upon
   idols. Hence it suited his purpose, not to extenuate, but rather to
   magnify the impiety that is involved in it. How absurd, then, it would
   have been to select an honorable term to denote the most heinous
   wickedness! It is certain from the Prophet Baruch, (4:7,) that those
   things that are sacrificed to idols are sacrificed to devils
   (Deuteronomy 32:17; Psalm 96:5.) In that passage in the writings of the
   Prophet, the Greek translation, which was at that time in common use,
   has daimonia -- demons, and this is its common use in Scripture. How
   much more likely is it then, that Paul borrowed what he says from the
   Prophet, to express the enormity of the evil, than that, speaking after
   the manner of the heathen, he extenuated what he was desirous to hold
   up to utter execration!

   It may seem, however, as if these things were somewhat at variance with
   what I stated a little ago -- that Paul had an eye to the intention of
   idolaters, for it is not their intention to worship devils, but
   imaginary deities of their own framing. I answer, that the two things
   are quite in harmony, for when men become so vain in their imaginations
   (Romans 1:21) as to render divine honor to creatures, rather than to
   the one God, this punishment is in readiness for them -- that they
   serve Satan. For they do not find that "middle place" [588] that they
   are in search of, but Satan straightway presents himself to them, as an
   object of adoration, whenever they have turned their back upon the true
   God.

   I would not that ye. If the term demon were used in an indifferent
   sense, how spiritless were Paul's statement here, while, instead of
   this, it has the greatest weight and severity against idolaters! He
   subjoins the reason -- because no one can have fellowship at the same
   time with God and with idols. Now, in all sacred observances, there is
   a profession of fellowship. Let us know, therefore, that we are then,
   and then only, admitted by Christ to the sacred feast of his body and
   blood, when we have first of all bid farewell to every thing
   sacrilegious. [589] For the man who would enjoy the one, must renounce
   the other. O thrice miserable the condition of those [590] who, from
   fear of displeasing men, do not hesitate to pollute themselves with
   unlawful superstitions! For, by acting in this way, they voluntarily
   renounce fellowship with Christ, and obstruct their approach to his
   health-giving table.

   22. Do we provoke the Lord? Having laid down the doctrine, he assumes a
   more vehement tone, from observing, that what was a most atrocious
   offense against God was regarded as nothing, or, at least, was looked
   upon as a very trivial error. The Corinthians wished the liberty that
   they took to be reckoned excusable, as there is not one of us that
   willingly allows himself to be found fault with, but, on the contrary,
   we seek one subterfuge after another, under which to shelter ourselves.
   Now Paul says, and not without reason, that in this way we wage war
   against God; for nothing does God more require from us than this --
   that we adhere strictly to everything that he declares in his word. Do
   not those, then, who use subterfuges, [591] in order that they may be
   at liberty to transgress the commandment of God, arm themselves openly
   against God? Hence that curse which the Prophet denounces against all
   those who call evil, good, and darkness, light (Isaiah 5:20.)

   Are we stronger? He warns them how dangerous a thing it is to provoke
   God -- because no one can do this but to his own ruin. [592] Among men
   the chance of war, as they speak, is doubtful, but to contend with God
   is nothing short of voluntarily courting destruction. Accordingly, if
   we fear to have God as an enemy, let us shudder at the thought of
   framing excuses for manifest sins, that is, whatever stand opposed to
   his word. Let us, also, shudder at the thought of calling in question
   those things that he has himself pronounced upon -- for this is nothing
   less than to rise up against heaven after the manner of the giants.
   [593] (Genesis 11:4.)

   23. All things are lawful for me Again he returns to the right of
   Christian liberty, by which the Corinthians defended themselves, and
   sets aside their objection by giving the same explanation as before.
   "To eat of meats that were sacrificed, and be present at the banquet,
   was an outward thing, and therefore was in itself lawful." Paul
   declares that he does not by any means call this in question, but he
   replies, that we must have a regard to edification. All things are
   lawful for me, says he, but all things are not profitable, that is, for
   our neighbors, for no one, as he immediately adds, ought to seek his
   own advantage exclusively, and if anything is not profitable to the
   brethren, it must be abstained from. He, in the next place, expresses
   the kind of advantage -- when it edifies, for we must not have respect
   merely to the advantage of the flesh. "What then? [594] Does a thing
   that is in other respects permitted by God, come on this account to be
   unlawful -- if it is not expedient for our neighbor. Then in that case
   our liberty would be placed under subjection to men." Consider
   attentively Paul's words, and you will perceive that liberty,
   nevertheless, remains unimpaired, when you accommodate yourself to your
   neighbors, and that it is only the use of it that is restricted, for he
   acknowledges that it is lawful, but says that it ought not to be made
   use of, if it does not edify

   24. Let no one seek his own. He handles the same subject in the 14th
   Chapter of the Romans. Let no one please himself, but endeavor to
   please his brethren for their edification This is a precept that is
   very necessary, for we are so corrupted by nature, that every one
   consults his own interests, regardless of those of his brethren. Now,
   as the law of love calls upon us to love our neighbors as ourselves,
   (Matthew 22:39,) so it requires us to consult their welfare. The
   Apostle, however, does not expressly forbid individuals to consult
   their own advantage, but he requires that they should not be so devoted
   to their own interests, as not to be prepared to forego part of their
   right, as often as the welfare of their brethren requires this.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [583] "Simplement, et en soy;" -- "Simply, and in themselves."

   [584] "Les ceremonies des dedicaces et consecrations solemlelles
   desquelles les Gentils vsent, ne sont que vent, et n'emportent rien;"
   -- "The ceremonies of solemn dedications and consecrations, which the
   Gentiles make use of, are mere wind, and signify nothing."

   [585] "Mais ie di, que les choses;" -- "But I say, that the things."

   [586] "Ils entcndoyent ceux qui estans hornroes de grand renom, auoyent
   este faits dieux;" -- "They meant those, who, being men of great
   renown, had been made gods."

   [587] The following instances may be adduced from Plato (in Sympos.):
   -- Pan to daimonion metaxu esti theou te kai thnetou -- Every demon
   holds a middle place between God and mortal man; Theos anthropo ou
   mignutai, alla dia daimonion pasa estin he homilia kai he dialektos
   theois pros anthropous -- God does not hold direct converse with man,
   but all intercourse and communication is carried on between gods and
   men by means of demons; To Daimonion estin ermeneuon kai diaporthmenon
   theios ta par anthropon, kai anthropois ta para theon, ton men tas
   deeseis kai thusias, ton de tas epitaxeis kai amoibas ton thusion -- a
   demon is an interpreter and reporter from men to the gods, and from the
   gods to men -- of the prayers and the sacrifices of the one, and the
   injunctions and rewards of devotion on the part of the other. -- Ed

   [588] Calvin has very probably in his eye here the sentiment of Plato
   already quoted -- that "every demon holds a middle place between God
   and mortal man." -- Ed.

   [589] "Quand auant que nous y presenter, nous auons renonce a tous
   sacrileges, c'est a dire a toute impiete et idolatrie;" -- "When,
   before approaching it, we have renounced everything sacrilegious, that
   is to say, all impiety and idolatry."

   [590] "O plus que miserable la condition de ceux;" -- "O more than
   miserable the condition of those."

   [591] "Qui ne veulent point venir au poinet;" -- "Who are not willing
   to come to the point."

   [592] "Ruine et condemnation;" -- "Ruin and condemnation."

   [593] The reader will find the same incident in Sacred History referred
   to by our Author, and dwelt upon at considerable length, in the
   Harmony, [22]vol. 1, p. 58. See also Calvin on Genesis, [23]vol. 1, p.
   328. -- Ed.

   [594] "Dira quelqu' vn;" -- "Some one will say."
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 10:25-33

   25. Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, that eat, asking no question
   for conscience sake:

   25. Quicquid in macello venditur, edite, nihil disceptantes propter
   conscientiam.

   26. For the earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof.

   26. Domini enim est terra, et plenitudo eius. (Psalm 24:1.)

   27. If any of them that believe not bid you to a feast, and ye be
   disposed to go; whatsoever is set before you, eat, asking no question
   for conscience sake.

   27. Si quis autem infidelium vos vocat, et vultis ire, quicquid vobis
   apponitur edite, nihil disceptantes propter conscientiam.

   28. But if any man say unto you, This is offered in sacrifice unto
   idols, eat not for his sake that shewed it, and for conscience sake:
   for the earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof:

   28. Quodsi quis vobis dixerit, Hoc est idolo immolatum: ne edatis
   propter eum qui indicavit, et propter conscientiam.

   29. Conscience, I say, not thine own, but of the other: for why is my
   liberty judged of another man's conscience?

   29. Conscientiam autem dico, non tuam, sed alterius: utquid enim
   libertas mea indicatur ab alia conscientia?

   30. For if I by grace be a partaker, why am I evil spoken of for that
   for which I give thanks?

   30. Si ergo per gratiam sum particeps, quid in eo blasphemor, in quo
   gratias ago?

   31. Whether therefore ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to
   the glory of God.

   31. Sive ergo editis, sive bibitis, sive quid aliud facitis, omnia in
   gloriam Dei facite.

   32. Give none offence, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to
   the church of God:

   32. Nullis satis offendiculo, sive Iudaeis, sive Graecis, et Ecclesiae
   Dei:

   33. Even as I please all men in all things, not seeking mine own
   profit, but the profit of many, that they may be saved.

   33. Quemadmodum ego quoque per omnia omnibus placeo, non quaerens quod
   mihi est utile, sed quod multis, ut salvi fiant.


   25. Whatsoever is sold in the shambles He has spoken above of
   dissembling in connection with idolatry, or, at least, as to those
   actions which the Corinthians could not engage in, without professing
   themselves to be the associates of the wicked in their superstitions.
   He now requires them, not merely to abstain from all professions of
   idolatry, but also to avoid carefully all occasions of offense, which
   are wont to arise from the indiscriminate use of things indifferent.
   For, although there was but one kind of offense on the part of the
   Corinthians, [595] there were, at the same time different degrees of
   it. Now, as to the eating of food, he makes, in the first place, this
   general statement -- that it is lawful to eat, with a safe conscience,
   any kind of food, because the Lord permits it. In the second place, he
   restricts this liberty as to the use of it -- lest weak consciences
   should be injured. Thus this conclusion is divided into two parts the
   first relates to liberty and power as to things indifferent: the second
   to a limitation of it -- that the use of it may be regulated in
   accordance with the rule of love.

   Debating nothing [596] 'Anakrinesthai, the word that Paul makes use of,
   means to reason on both sides, [597] in such a way, that the person's
   mind vacillates, inclining now to this side, and then to that. [598]
   Accordingly, in so far as concerns a distinction of meats, he frees our
   consciences from all scruple and hesitation; because it is proper that,
   when we are certain from the word of the Lord that he approves of what
   we do, we should have ease and tranquillity in our minds.

   For conscience sake -- that is to say, Before the judgment-seat of God
   -- "In so far as you have to do with God, there is no occasion for your
   disputing with yourself, whether it be lawful or not. For I allow you
   to eat freely of all kinds of meat, because the Lord allows you
   everything without exception."

   26. The earth is the Lord's He establishes, from the testimony of
   David, the liberty which he had allowed. (Psalm 24:1, and Psalm 50:12.)
   But it will be asked by some one, "What has this to do with the point?"
   I answer, If the fullness of the earth [599] is the Lord's, there is
   nothing in the world that is not sacred and pure. We must always keep
   in view, what the question is of which the Apostle treats. It might be
   doubted, whether the creatures of God were polluted by the sacrifices
   of the wicked. Paul says they are not, inasmuch as the rule and
   possession of the whole earth remain always in the hands of God. Now,
   what things the Lord has in his hands, he preserves by his power, and
   consequently sanctifies them. The sons of God, therefore, have the pure
   use of everything, because they receive them no otherwise than from the
   hand of God.

   The fullness of the earth, [600] is an expression which is made use of
   by the Prophet to denote the abundance of blessings, with which the
   earth is furnished and adorned by the Lord. For if the earth were
   stripped of trees, herbs, animals, and other things, it would be like a
   house devoid of furniture and every kind of utensil: nay more, it would
   be mutilated and disfigured. Should any one object, that the earth is
   cursed on account of sin, the answer is easy -- that he has an eye to
   its pure and perfect nature, because Paul is speaking of believers, to
   whom all things are sanctified through Christ.

   27. If any one of them that believe not invites you. Here follows an
   exception, to this effect, that if a believer has been warned, that
   what is set before him has been offered to an idol, and sees that there
   is a danger of offense being given, he sins against the brethren if he
   does not abstain. He shows then, in short, that care must be taken not
   to hurt weak consciences.

   When he says -- and you are willing to go, he intimates indirectly,
   that he does not altogether approve of it, and that it would be better
   if they declined, but as it is a thing indifferent, he does not choose
   to forbid it absolutely. And, certainly, there could be nothing better
   than to keep at a distance from such snares -- not that those are
   expressly to be condemned, who accommodate themselves to men only in so
   far as conscience permits, [601] but because it becomes us to proceed
   with caution, [602] where we see that we are in danger of falling.

   29. Conscience, I say, not thine own He always carefully takes heed not
   to diminish liberty, or to appear to take from it in any degree. "Thou
   oughtest to bear with the weak conscience of thy brother, that thou
   mayest not abuse thy right, so as to give occasion of offense to him;
   but in the meantime thy conscience remains, nevertheless, free, because
   it is exempted from that subjection. Let not, therefore, the restraint
   which I impose upon thee as to outward use, become by any means a snare
   to entangle thy conscience."

   It must be observed here, that the term conscience is taken here in its
   strict acceptation; for in Romans 13:5, and 1 Timothy 1:5, it is taken
   in a larger sense. "We ought, says Paul, to obey princes, not merely
   for the sake of wrath, but also for that of conscience" -- that is, not
   merely from fear of punishment, but because the Lord orders it so, and
   it is our duty. Is it not reasonable, too, that we should for the same
   reason accommodate ourselves to weak brethren -- that is, because we
   are to this extent subject to them in the sight of God? Farther, the
   end of the commandment is love out of a good conscience Is not the
   affection of love included in a good conscience? Hence its meaning here
   is, as I have already stated, more restricted, inasmuch as the soul of
   a pious man looks exclusively to the tribunal of God, has no regard to
   men, is satisfied with the blessing of liberty procured for it by
   Christ, and is bound to no individuals, and to no circumstances of time
   or place.

   Some manuscripts repeat the statement -- The earth is the Lord's. But
   the probability is, that some reader having put it on the margin, it
   had crept into the text. [603] It is not, however, a matter of great
   importance.

   For why is my liberty It is doubtful, whether Paul speaks in this way
   of himself, or whether he makes this objection in the name of the
   Corinthians. If we take it as spoken in his own name, it will be a
   confirmation of the preceding statement. "In restricting yourself, for
   the sake of another man's conscience, your liberty is not thereby made
   subject to him." If in the name of the Corinthians, the meaning will be
   this: "You impose upon us an unjust law, in requiring that our liberty
   should stand or fall at the caprice of others." I am of opinion, that
   Paul says this of himself, but explains it in another way, for hitherto
   I have been stating the views of others. To be judged, then, I explain
   here as meaning -- to be condemned, agreeably to the common acceptation
   of the word in Scripture. Paul warns us of the danger that must ensue,
   if we make use of our liberty unreservedly, so as to give occasion of
   offense to our neighbors -- that they will condemn it. Thus, through
   our fault, and our unreasonableness, the consequence will be, that this
   special benefit from God will be condemned If we do not guard against
   this danger, we corrupt our liberty by our abuse of it. This
   consideration, then, tends very much to confirm Paul's exhortation.

   30. If therefore by grace. This argument is similar to the preceding
   one, or nearly so. "As it is owing to the kindness of God that all
   things are lawful for me, why should I act in such a manner, that it
   should be reckoned to my account as a vice?" We cannot, it is true,
   prevent the wicked from reviling us, nor even the weak from being
   sometimes displeased with us; but Paul here reproves the forwardness of
   those, who of their own accord give occasion of offense, and hurt weak
   consciences, when neither necessity or expediency calls for it. He
   would have us, then, make a good use of our benefits, [604] that the
   weak may not have occasion of reviling from our inconsiderate use of
   liberty.

   31. Whether, therefore, ye eat, or drink Lest they should think, that
   in so small a matter they should not be so careful to avoid blame, he
   teaches that there is no part of our life, and no action so minute,
   [605] that it ought not to be directed to the glory of God, and that we
   must take care that, even in eating and drinking, we may aim at the
   advancement of it. This statement is connected with what goes before;
   for if we are eagerly desirous of the glory of God, as it becomes us to
   be, we will never allow, so far as we can prevent it, his benefits to
   lie under reproach. It was well expressed anciently in a common
   proverb, that we must not live to eat; but eat to live [606] Provided
   the end of living be at the same time kept in view, the consequence
   will thus be, that our food will be in a manner sacred to God, inasmuch
   as it will be set apart for his service.

   32. Be not occasions of stumbling to any This is the second point,
   which it becomes us to have an eye to -- the rule of love. A desire,
   then, for the glory of God, holds the first place; a regard to our
   neighbor holds the second He makes mention of Jews and Gentiles, not
   merely because the Church of God consisted of those two classes, but to
   teach us that we are debtors to all, even to strangers, that we may, if
   possible, gain them. (1 Corinthians 9:20, 21.)

   33. Even as I please all men in all this As he speaks in a general way,
   and without exception, some extend it by mistake to things that are
   unlawful, and at variance with the word of the Lord -- as if it were
   allowable, for the sake of our neighbor, to venture farther than the
   Lord permits us. It is, however, more than certain, that Paul
   accommodated himself to men only in things indifferent, and in things
   lawful in themselves. Farther, the end must be carefully observed --
   that they may be saved Hence what is opposed to their salvation ought
   not to be conceded to them, [607] but we must use prudence, and that of
   a spiritual kind. [608]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [595] "Car combien que les Corinthiens faissent en cela plusieurs
   fautes qui estoyent toutes comprises sous vne generalite;" -- "For
   although the Corinthians in this case committed many faults which were
   all comprehended under one general description."

   [596] "Sans en enquerir rien;" -- "Without asking any question as to
   it."

   [597] "Debatre en son entendement pour et contre, comme on dit;" -- "To
   debate in one's mind for and against, as they say.

   [598] 'Anakrino, properly means to examine narrowly It is stated by
   Bloomfield, that "the best recent Commentators consider the expression
   meden anakrinontes, as put for meden kreas (that is, kreatos genos)
   anakrinontes, examining no kind of meat, to see whether it be idol-meat
   or not." This interpretation is natural, and agrees particularly well
   with the expression, as repeated in the 27^th verse. -- Ed

   [599] "C'est a dire, le contenu d'icelle;" -- "That is to say, what it
   contains."

   [600] "Lequel mot nous auons traduit, Le contenu de la terre;" --
   "Which expression we have rendered -- What the earth contains."

   [601] "Seulement autant que faire se pent sans offenser Dieu;" -- "Only
   so far as they can do so without offending God."

   [602] "Auec grand auis et prudence;" -- "With great care and prudence."

   [603] It is omitted in the Alex., Clermont, and in all of the more
   ancient MSS.; and in the Syriac, Arabic, and Vulgate versions. -- Ed.

   [604] "C'est a dire, de nestre liberte;" -- "That is to say, of our
   liberty."

   [605] "Qu'il n'y a rien en toute nostre vie, tant petit soit-il;" --
   "That there is nothing in our whole life, be it ever so small."

   [606] The proverbial expression referred to occurs in Auctor. ad
   Herenn. 4. 28: -- "Esse oportet ut vivas, non vivere ut edas;" -- "You
   should eat to live -- not live to eat." -- Ed.

   [607] "I1 ne leur faut pas accorder, et s'accommoder a eux en cela;" --
   "It is not proper to concede to them, and to accommodate ourselves to
   them in that."

   [608] The view here given by Calvin of the spirit by which Paul was
   actuated in this part of his conduct, is most successfully brought out,
   at greater length, by the Reverend Andrew Fuller, when comparing 1
   Corinthians 10:33, with Galatians 1:10. -- "Though both these kinds of
   action are expressed by one term -- to please -- yet they are
   exceedingly diverse; no less so than a conduct which has the glory of
   God and the good of mankind for its object, and one that originates and
   terminates in self. The former of these passages should be read in
   connection with what precedes and follows it, (1 Corinthians 10:31-33.)
   Hence it appears plain, that the things in which the Apostle pleased
   all, men, require to be restricted to such things as tend to their
   profit, that they may be saved.' Whereas the things in which, according
   to the latter passage, he could not please men, and yet be the servant
   of Christ, were of a contrary tendency. Such were the objects pursued
   by the false teachers whom he opposed, and who desired to make a fair
   show in the flesh, lest they should suffer persecution for the cross of
   Christ.' (1 Corinthians 6:12.) The former is that sweet inoffensiveness
   of spirit which teaches us to lay aside all selfwill and
   self-importance, that charity which seeketh not her own,' and is not
   easily provoked;' it is that spirit, in short, which the same writer
   elsewhere recommends from the example of Christ himself: We, then, who
   are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to
   please ourselves. Let every one of us please his neighbor, for his good
   to edification: for even Christ pleased not himself; but, as it is
   written, The reproaches of them that reproached thee fell on me.' But
   the latter spirit referred to is that sordid compliance with the
   corruptions of human nature, of which flatterers and deceivers have
   always availed themselves, not for the glory of God or the good of men,
   but for the promotion of their own selfish designs." -- Fullers Works,
   volume 3. -- Ed.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 11
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 11:1-16

   1. Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ.

   1. Imitatores mei estote, sicut et ego Christi.

   2. Now I praise you, brethren, that ye remember me in all things, and
   keep the ordinances, as I delivered them to you.

   2. Laudo autem vos, fratres, quod omnia mea meministis et traditiones
   [609] tenetis, quemadmodum vobis tradidi.

   3. But I would have you know, that the head of every man is Christ; and
   the head of the woman is the man; and the head of Christ is God.

   3. Volo autem vos scire, quod omnis viri caput est Christus, caput
   autem mulieris, vir: caput autem Christi, Deus.

   4. Every man praying or prophesying, having his head covered,
   dishonoureth his head.

   4. Omnis vir orans aut prophetans velato capite, dedecore afficit caput
   suum.

   5. But every woman that prayeth or prophesieth with her head uncovered
   dishonoureth her head: for that is even all one as if she were shaven.

   5. Omnis mulier orans aut prophetans aperto capite, dedecore afticit
   caput suum: perinde enim acsi radatur.

   6. For if the woman be not covered, let her also be shorn: but if it be
   a shame for a woman to be shorn or shaven, let her be covered.

   6. Si enim non velatur mulier, etiam tondeatur: si autem mulieri turpe
   est tonderi aut radi, veletur.

   7. For a man indeed ought not to cover his head, forasmuch as he is the
   image and glory of God: but the woman is the glory of the man.

   7. Vir quidem velato esse capite non debet, quum sit imago et gloria
   Dei: mulier autem gloria viri est.

   8. For the man is not of the woman; but the woman of the man.

   8. Non enim est virex muliere, sed mulier ex viro.

   9. Neither was the man created for the woman; but the woman for the
   man.

   9. Etenim non est creatus vir mulieris causa, sed mulier causa viri.

   10. For this cause ought the woman to have power on her head because of
   the angels.

   10. Propterea debet mulier potestatem habere super caput suum, propter
   angelos.

   11. Nevertheless neither is the man without the woman, neither the
   woman without the man, in the Lord.

   11. Caeterum neque vir absque muliere, neque mulier absque viro in
   Domino.

   12. For as the woman is of the man, even so is the man also by the
   woman; but all things of God.

   12. Quemadmodum enim mulier ex viro, sic et vir per mulierem: olnnia
   autem ex Deo.

   13. Judge in yourselves: is it comely that a woman pray unto God
   uncovered?

   13. In vobis ipsis iudicate, deceatne mulierem retecto capite Deum
   precari.

   14. Doth not even nature itself teach you, that, if a man have long
   hair, it is a shame unto him?

   14. An ne ipsa quidem natura vos docet, quod si vir comam alat, dedecus
   illi sit?

   15. But if a woman have long hair, it is a glory to her: for her hair
   is given her for a covering.

   15. Si vero mulier comam alat, gloria sit illi? quoniam illi coma
   instar velamenti data est.

   16. But if any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom,
   neither the churches of God.

   16. Quodsi quis videtur contentiosus esse, nos talem consuetudinem non
   habemus, neque Ecclesiae Dei.


   1. Imitators of me. From this it appears, how absurdly chapters are
   divided, inasmuch as this sentence is disjoined from what goes before,
   with which it ought to have been connected, and is joined to what
   follows, with which it has no connection. Let us view this, then, as
   the close of the preceding chapter. Paul had there brought forward his
   own example in confirmation of his doctrine. Now, in order that the
   Corinthians may understand that this would be becoming in them, he
   exhorts them to imitate what he had done, even as he had imitated
   Christ

   Here there are two things to be observed -- first, that he prescribes
   nothing to others that he had not first practiced himself; and,
   secondly, that he directs himself and others to Christ as the only
   pattern of right acting. For while it is the part of a good teacher to
   enjoin nothing in words but what he is prepared to practice in action,
   he must not, at the same time, be so austere, as straightway to require
   from others everything that he does himself, as is the manner of the
   superstitious. For everything that they contract a liking for they
   impose also upon others, and would have their own example to be held
   absolutely as a rule. The world is also, of its own accord, inclined to
   a misdirected imitation, (kakozelian) [610] and, after the manner of
   apes, strive to copy whatever they see done by persons of great
   influence. We see, however how many evils have been introduced into the
   Church by this absurd desire of imitating all the actions of the
   saints, without exception. Let us, therefore, maintain so much the more
   carefully this doctrine of Paul -- that we are to follow men, provided
   they take Christ as their grand model, (prototupon,) that the examples
   of the saints may not tend to lead us away from Christ, but rather to
   direct us to him.

   2. Now I praise you He passes on now to another subject-to instruct the
   Corinthians, what decorum ought to be observed in the sacred
   assemblies. For as a man's dress or gesture has in some cases the
   effect of disfiguring, and in others of adorning him, so all actions
   are set off to advantage by decorum, and are vitiated by the want of
   it. Much, therefore, depends upon decorum (to prepon,) [611] and that
   not merely for securing for our actions gracefulness and beauty, but
   also to accustom our minds to propriety. While this is true in a
   general way as to everything, it holds especially as to sacred things;
   [612] for what contempt, and, eventually, what barbarism will be
   incurred, if we do not preserve dignity in the Church, by conducting
   ourselves honorably and becomingly? Hence he prescribes some things
   that are connected with public order, by which sacred assemblies are
   rendered honorable. But in order to prepare them the more for
   obedience, he commends, in the outset, their obedience in the past,
   inasmuch as they observed his ordinances; for inasmuch as he had
   begotten that Church to the Lord, (1 Corinthians 4:15,) he had
   delivered to them a certain system, by which it was to be governed. By
   retaining this, the Corinthians gave reason to hope, that they would
   also in future be docile.

   It is surprising, however, that, while he now bestows upon them this
   commendation, he had previously blamed them for many things. Nay more,
   if we consider the state of the Church, such as has been previously
   described, they were far from deserving this praise. I answer, that
   there were some that were infected with those vices which he had
   previously reproved, and indeed, some with one, others with another;
   but, in the meantime, the form which he had prescribed to them had been
   retained by the entire body. For there is nothing of inconsistency in
   saying, that very many sins, and of various kinds, prevail among a
   particular people -- some cheating, others plundering -- some envying,
   others quarrelling, and another class guilty of fornication -- while,
   at the same time, in respect of the public form of the Church, the
   institutions of Christ and his Apostles are maintained.

   This will appear more clearly when we come to see what Paul means by
   paradoseis; (traditions;) [613] and independently of this, it is
   necessary to speak of this word, for the purpose of replying to
   Papists, who arm themselves with this passage for the purpose of
   defending their traditions. It is a common maxim among them, that the
   doctrine of the Apostles consists partly of writings and partly of
   traditions. Under this second department they include not merely
   certain foolish superstitions, and puerile ceremonies, with which they
   are stuffed, but also all kinds of gross abomination, directly contrary
   to the plain word of God, and their tyrannical laws, which are mere
   torments to men's consciences. In this way there is nothing that is so
   foolish, nothing so absurd -- in fine, nothing so monstrous, as not to
   have shelter under this pretext, and to be painted over with this
   varnish. As Paul, therefore, makes mention here of traditions, they
   seize, as they are accustomed to do, upon this little word, with the
   view of making Paul the author of all those abominations, which we set
   aside by plain declaration of Scripture.

   I do not deny, that there were certain traditions [614] of the Apostles
   that were not committed to writing, but I do not admit that they were
   parts of doctrine, or related to things necessary for salvation. What
   then? They were connected with order and government. For we know that
   every Church has liberty to frame for itself a form of government that
   is suitable and profitable for it, because the Lord has not prescribed
   anything definite. Thus Paul, the first founder of the Corinthian
   Church, had also framed for its regulation pious and seemly enactments
   -- that all things might be done decently and in order, as he
   afterwards enjoins. (1 Corinthians 14:40.) But what has this to do with
   those silly trifles of ceremonies, which are to be seen in Popery?
   [615] What has it to do with a worse than Jewish superstition? What has
   it to do with a tyranny worthy of Phalaris, [616] by which they torture
   miserable consciences? What has it to do with so many monstrous rites
   of idolatry? For the foundation of all right enactment was this: to
   observe the moderation that Paul made use of -- not to compel persons
   to follow their enactments, [617] while, in the meantime, contriving
   everything that might strike their fancy, but to require that they
   should be imitated, in so far as they are imitators of Christ But now,
   after having had the audacity to criticize everything agreeably to
   their own humor, to demand obedience from all is exceedingly absurd.
   Farther, we must know that Paul commends their obedience in the past,
   in order that he may render them docile also for the time to come.

   3. But I would have you know It is an old proverb: "Evil manners beget
   good laws." [618] As the rite here treated of had not been previously
   called in question, Paul had given no enactment respecting it. [619]
   The error of the Corinthians was the occasion of his showing, what part
   it was becoming to act in this matter. With the view of proving, that
   it is an unseemly thing for women to appear in a public assembly with
   their heads uncovered, and, on the other hand, for men to pray or
   prophesy with their heads covered, he sets out with noticing the
   arrangements that are divinely established.

   He says, that as Christ is subject to God as his head, so is the man
   subject to Christ, and the woman to the man We shall afterwards see,
   how he comes to infer from this, that women ought to have their heads
   covered. Let us, for the present, take notice of those four gradations
   which he points out. God, then, occupies the first place: Christ holds
   the second place. How so? Inasmuch as he has in our flesh made himself
   subject to the Father, for, apart from this, being of one essence with
   the Father, he is his equal. Let us, therefore, bear it in mind, that
   this is spoken of Christ as mediator. He is, I say, inferior to the
   Father, inasmuch as he assumed our nature, that he might be the
   first-born among many brethren.

   There is somewhat more of difficulty in what follows. Here the man is
   placed in an intermediate position between Christ and the woman, so
   that Christ is not the head of the woman. Yet the same Apostle teaches
   us elsewhere, (Galatians 3:28,) that in Christ there is neither male
   nor female. Why then does he make a distinction here, which in that
   passage he does away with? I answer, that the solution of this depends
   on the connection in which the passages occur. When he says that there
   is no difference between the man and the woman, he is treating of
   Christ's spiritual kingdom, in which individual distinctions [620] are
   not regarded, or made any account of; for it has nothing to do with the
   body, and has nothing to do with the outward relationships of mankind,
   but has to do solely with the mind -- on which account he declares that
   there is no difference, even between bond and free. In the meantime,
   however, he does not disturb civil order or honorary distinctions,
   which cannot be dispensed with in ordinary life. Here, on the other
   hand, he reasons respecting outward propriety and decorum -- which is a
   part of ecclesiastical polity. Hence, as regards spiritual connection
   in the sight of God, and inwardly in the conscience, Christ is the head
   of the man and of the woman without any distinction, because, as to
   that, there is no regard paid to male or female; but as regards
   external arrangement and political decorum, the man follows Christ and
   the woman the man, so that they are not upon the same footing, but, on
   the contrary, this inequality exists. Should any one ask, what
   connection marriage has with Christ, I answer, that Paul speaks here of
   that sacred union of pious persons, of which Christ is the officiating
   priest, [621] and He in whose name it is consecrated.

   4. Every man praying Here there are two propositions. The first relates
   to the man, the other to the woman He says that the man commits an
   offense against Christ his head, if he prays or prophesies with his
   head covered. Why so? Because he is subject to Christ, with this
   understanding, that he is to hold the first place in the government of
   the house -- for the father of the family is like a king in his own
   house. Hence the glory of God shines forth in him, in consequence of
   the authority with which he is invested. If he covers his head, he lets
   himself down from that preeminence which God had assigned to him, so as
   to be in subjection. Thus the honor of Christ is infringed upon. For
   example, [622] If the person whom the prince has appointed as his
   lieutenant, does not know how to maintain his proper station, [623] and
   instead of this, exposes his dignity to contempt on the part of persons
   in the lowest station, does he not bring dishonor upon his prince? In
   like manner, if the man does not keep his own station -- if he is not
   subject to Christ in such a way as to preside over his own family with
   authority, he obscures, to that extent, the glory of Christ, which
   shines forth in the well regulated order of marriage. The covering, as
   we shall see ere long, is an emblem of authority intermediate and
   interposed.

   Prophesying I take here to mean -- declaring the mysteries of God for
   the edification of the hearers, (as afterwards in 1 Corinthians 14,) as
   praying means preparing a form of prayer, and taking the lead, as it
   were, of all the people -- which is the part of the public teacher,
   [624] for Paul is not arguing here as to every kind of prayer, but as
   to solemn prayer in public. Let us, however, bear in mind, that in this
   matter the error is merely in so far as decorum is violated, and the
   distinction of rank which God has established, is broken in upon. For
   we must not be so scrupulous as to look upon it as a criminal thing for
   a teacher to have a cap on his head, when addressing the people from
   the pulpit. Paul means nothing more than this -- that it should appear
   that the man has authority, and that the woman is under subjection, and
   this is secured when the man uncovers his head in the view of the
   Church, though he should afterwards put on his cap again from fear of
   catching cold. In fine, the one rule to be observed here is to prepon
   -- decorum If that is secured, Paul requires nothing farther.

   5. Every woman praying or prophesying Here we have the second
   proposition -- that women ought to have their heads covered when they
   pray or prophesy; otherwise they dishonor their head For as the man
   honors his head by showing his liberty, so the woman, by showing her
   subjection. Hence, on the other hand, if the woman uncovers her head,
   she shakes off subjection -- involving contempt of her husband. It may
   seem, however, to be superfluous for Paul to forbid the woman to
   prophesy with her head uncovered, while elsewhere he wholly

   prohibits women from speaking in the Church.
   (1 Timothy 2:12.)

   It would not, therefore, be allowable for them to prophesy even with a
   covering upon their head, and hence it follows that it is to no purpose
   that he argues here as to a covering. It may be replied, that the
   Apostle, by here condemning the one, does not commend the other. For
   when he reproves them for prophesying with their head uncovered, he at
   the same time does not give them permission to prophesy in some other
   way, but rather delays his condemnation of that vice to another
   passage, namely in 1 Corinthians 14. In this reply there is nothing
   amiss, though at the same time it might suit sufficiently well to say,
   that the Apostle requires women to show their modesty -- not merely in
   a place in which the whole Church is assembled, but also in any more
   dignified assembly, either of matrons or of men, such as are sometimes
   convened in private houses.

   6. For it is all one as if she were shaven. He now maintains from other
   considerations, that it is unseemly for women to have their heads bare.
   Nature itself, says he, abhors it. To see a woman shaven is a spectacle
   that is disgusting and monstrous. Hence we infer that the woman has her
   hair given her for a covering Should any one now object, that her hair
   is enough, as being a natural covering, Paul says that it is not, for
   it is such a covering as requires another thing to be made use of for
   covering it And hence a conjecture is drawn, with some appearance of
   probability -- that women who had beautiful hair were accustomed to
   uncover their heads for the purpose of showing off their beauty. It is
   not, therefore, without good reason that Paul, as a remedy for this
   vice, sets before them the opposite idea -- that they be regarded as
   remarkable for unseemliness, rather than for what is an incentive to
   lust. [625]

   7. The man ought not to cover his head, because he is the image The
   same question may now be proposed respecting the image, as formerly
   respecting the head. For both sexes were created in the image of God,
   and Paul exhorts women no less than men to be formed anew, according to
   that image. The image, however, of which he is now speaking, relates to
   the order of marriage, and hence it belongs to the present life, and is
   not connected with conscience. The simple solution is this -- that he
   does not treat here of innocence and holiness, which are equally
   becoming in men and women, but of the distinction, which God has
   conferred upon the man, so as to have superiority over the woman. In
   this superior order of dignity the glory of God is seen, as it shines
   forth in every kind of superiority.

   The woman is the glory of the man There is no doubt that the woman is a
   distinguished ornament of the man; for it is a great honor that God has
   appointed her to the man as the partner of his life, and a helper to
   him, [626] and has made her subject to him as the body is to the head.
   For what Solomon affirms as to a careful wife -- that she is a crown to
   her husband, (Proverbs 12:4,) is true of the whole sex, if we look to
   the appointment of God, which Paul here commends, showing that the
   woman was created for this purpose -- that she might be a distinguished
   ornament of the man.

   8. For the man is not from the woman. He establishes by two arguments
   the pre-eminence, which he had assigned to men above women. The first
   is, that as the woman derives her origin from the man, she is therefore
   inferior in rank. The second is, that as the woman was created for the
   sake of the man, she is therefore subject to him, as the work
   ultimately produced is to its cause. [627] That the man is the
   beginning of the woman and the end for which she was made, is evident
   from the law. (Genesis 2:18.)

   It is not good for a man to be alone. Let us make for him, etc.

   Farther,

   God took one of Adam's ribs and formed Eve.
   (Genesis 2:21, 22.)

   10. For this cause ought the woman to have power [628] From that
   authority he draws an argument [629] in favor of outward decorum. "She
   is subject," says he, "let her then wear a token of subjection." In the
   term power, there is an instance of metonymy, [630] for he means a
   token by which she declares herself to be under the power of her
   husband; and it is a covering, whether it be a robe, or a veil, [631]
   or any other kind of covering. [632]

   It is asked, whether he speaks of married women exclusively, for there
   are some that restrict to them what Paul here teaches, on the ground
   that it does not belong to virgins to be under the authority of a
   husband. It is however a mistake, for Paul looks beyond this -- to
   God's eternal law, which has made the female sex subject to the
   authority of men. On this account all women are born, that they may
   acknowledge themselves inferior in consequence of the superiority of
   the male sex. Otherwise it were an inconclusive argument that Paul has
   drawn from nature, in saying that it were not one whit more seemly for
   a woman to have her head uncovered than to be shaven -- this being
   applicable to virgins also.

   Because of the angels This passage is explained in various ways. As the
   Prophet Malachi 2:7 calls priests angels of God, some are of opinion
   that Paul speaks of them; but the ministers of the word have nowhere
   that term applied to them by itself -- that is, without something being
   added; and the meaning would be too forced. I understand it, therefore,
   in its proper signification. But it is asked, why it is that he would
   have women have their heads covered because of the angels -- for what
   has this to do with them? Some answer: "Because they are present on
   occasion of the prayers of believers, and on this account are
   spectators of unseemliness, should there be any on such occasions." But
   what need is there for philosophizing with such refinement? We know
   that angels are in attendance, also, upon Christ as their head, and
   minister to him. [633] When, therefore, women venture upon such
   liberties, as to usurp for themselves the token of authority, they make
   their baseness manifest to the angels. This, therefore, was said by way
   of amplifying, as if he had said, "If women uncover their heads, not
   only Christ, but all the angels too, will be witnesses of the outrage."
   And this interpretation suits well with the Apostle's design. He is
   treating here of different ranks. Now he says that, when women assume a
   higher place than becomes them, they gain this by it -- that they
   discover their impudence in the view of the angels of heaven.

   11. But neither is the man without the woman This is added partly as a
   check upon men, that they may not insult over women; [634] and partly
   as a consolation to women, that they may not feel dissatisfied with
   being under subjection. "The male sex (says he) has a distinction over
   the female sex, with this understanding, that they ought to be
   connected together by mutual benevolence, for the one cannot do without
   the other. If they be separated, they are like the mutilated members of
   a mangled body. Let them, therefore, be connected with each other by
   the bond of mutual duty." [635]

   When he says, in the Lord, he by this expression calls the attention of
   believers to the appointment of the Lord, while the wicked look to
   nothing beyond pressing necessity. [636] For profane men, if they can
   conveniently live unmarried, despise the whole sex, and do not consider
   that they are under obligations to it by the appointment and decree of
   God. The pious, on the other hand, acknowledge that the male sex is but
   the half of the human race. They ponder the meaning of that statement
   -- God created man: male and female created he them (Genesis 1:27, and
   Genesis 5:2.) Thus they, of their own accord, acknowledge themselves to
   be debtors to the weaker sex. Pious women, in like manner, reflect upon
   their obligation. [637] Thus the man has no standing without the woman,
   for that would be the head severed from the body; nor has the woman
   without the man, for that were a body without a head. "Let, therefore,
   the man perform to the woman the office of the head in respect of
   ruling her, and let the woman perform to the man the office of the body
   in respect of assisting him, and that not merely in the married state,
   but also in celibacy; for I do not speak of cohabitation merely, but
   also of civil offices, for which there is occasion even in the
   unmarried state." If you are inclined rather to refer this to the whole
   sex in general, I do not object to this, though, as Paul directs his
   discourse to individuals, he appears to point out the particular duty
   of each.

   12. As the woman is of the man If this is one of the reasons, why the
   man has superiority -- that the woman was taken out of him, there will
   be, in like manner, this motive to friendly connection -- that the male
   sex cannot maintain and preserve itself without the aid of women. For
   this remains a settled point -- that it is not good for man to be alone
   (Genesis 2:18.) This statement of Paul may, it is true, be viewed as
   referring to propagation, because human beings are propagated not by
   men alone, but by men and women; but I understand it as meaning this
   also -- that the woman is a needful help to the man, inasmuch as a
   solitary life is not expedient for man. This decree of God exhorts us
   to cultivate mutual intercourse.

   But all things of God God is the Source of both sexes, and hence both
   of them ought with humility to accept and maintain the condition which
   the Lord has assigned to them. Let the man exercise his authority with
   moderation, and not insult over the woman who has been given him as his
   partner. Let the woman be satisfied with her state of subjection, and
   not take it amiss that she is made inferior to the more distinguished
   sex. Otherwise they will both of them throw off the yoke of God, who
   has not without good reason appointed this distinction of ranks.
   Farther, when it is said that the man and the woman, when they are
   wanting in their duty to each other, are rebels against the authority
   of God, the statement is a more serious one than if Paul had said, that
   they do injury to one another.

   Doth not even nature itself He again sets forth nature as the mistress
   of decorum, and what was at that time in common use by universal
   consent and custom -- even among the Greeks -- he speaks of as being
   natural, for it was not always reckoned a disgrace for men to have long
   hair. [638] Historical records bear, that in all countries in ancient
   times, that is, in the first ages, men wore long hair. Hence also the
   poets, in speaking of the ancients, are accustomed to apply to them the
   common epithet of unshorn [639] It was not until a late period that
   barbers began to be employed at Rome -- about the time of Africanus the
   elder. And at the time when Paul wrote these things, the practice of
   having the hair shorn had not yet come into use in the provinces of
   Gaul or in Germany. Nay more, it would have been reckoned an unseemly
   thing for men, no less than for women, to be shorn or shaven; but as in
   Greece it was reckoned all unbecoming thing for a man to allow his hair
   to grow long, so that those who did so were remarked as effeminate, he
   reckons as nature a custom that had come to be confirmed. [640]

   16. But if any man seem A contentious person is one whose humor
   inclines him to stir up disputes, and does not care what becomes of the
   truth. Of this description are all who, without any necessity, abolish
   good and useful customs -- raise disputes respecting matters that are
   not doubtful -- who do not yield to reasonings -- who cannot endure
   that any one should be above them. Of this description, also, are those
   (akoinonetoi) would be singular persons [641] who, from a foolish
   affectation, [642] aim at some new and unusual way of acting. Such
   persons Paul does not reckon worthy of being replied to, inasmuch as
   contention is a pernicious thing, and ought, therefore, to be banished
   from the Churches. By this he teaches us, that those that are obstinate
   and fond of quarrelling, should rather be restrained by authority than
   confuted by lengthened disputations. For you will never have an end of
   contentions, if you are disposed to contend with a combative person
   until you have vanquished him; for though vanquished a hundred times,
   he would argue still. Let us therefore carefully mark this passage,
   that we may not allow ourselves to be carried away with needless
   disputations, provided at the same time we know how to distinguish
   contentious persons. For we must not always reckon as contentious the
   man who does not acquiesce in our decisions, or who ventures to
   contradict us; but when temper and obstinacy show themselves, let us
   then say with Paul, that contentions are at variance with the custom of
   the Church [643]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [609] "Mes ordonnances;" -- "My ordinances."

   [610] "Kakozelia, an absurd invitation The term is used in this sense
   by Lucian. (V. 70.) Our author makes use of the same term in the
   Harmony, [24]vol. 1, p. 209, n. 2. -- Ed

   [611] To prepon, may be defined to be the union of propriety and grace.
   Prepon and kalon being used among the Greeks and among the Romans,
   pulchrum and decorum, as synonymous terms. See Cic. de Off., 1, 27. --
   Ed

   [612] "Es choses qui concement le seruice de Dieu;" -- "In things that
   concern the service of God."

   [613] "Traditions ou ordonnances;" -- "Traditions or ordinances."

   [614] "Quelques ordonnances;" -- "Certain enactments."

   [615] "Les sottes ceremonies et badinages, qu'on voit auiourd'huy en la
   Papaute;" -- "The silly ceremonies and fooleries that are to be seen in
   Popery at this day."

   [616] "Ceste tyrannic plus que barbare;" -- "That worse than barbarous
   cruelty." Phalaris, the tyrant of Agrigentum in Sicily, was infamous
   for his cruelty. Cicero on more than one occasion employs the term
   Phalarismus to denote excessive cruelty. See Cic. Att. 7. 12, and Fam.
   7. 11. -- Ed.

   [617] "Leurs arrests et determinations" -- "Their decrees and
   determinations."

   [618] Matthew Henry makes use of this proverb in his Commentary, when
   summing up the contents of Luke 15. -- Ed.

   [619] "N'en auoit rien touche es enseignemens qu'il auoit donnez;" --
   "Had not touched upon it at all in the instructions which he had
   given."

   [620] "Les qualites externes;" "External qualities."

   [621] "Autheur et conducteur;" -- "Author and conductor."

   [622] "Mais afin de mieux entendre ceci, prenons vn exemple;" -- "But,
   that we may understand this better, let us take an example."

   [623] "Se maintenir, et vser de son authorite;" -- "To keep his place,
   and maintain his authority."

   [624] "Du ministre et docteur de l'Eglise;" -- "Of the minister and
   teacher of the Church."

   [625] "Sainct Paul pour remedier  ce vice, propose tout le contraire
   de ce qui leur sembloit; disant, que tant s'en faut qu'en cela il y ait
   vne beaute pour attirer les hommes a connoitise, que plustot c'est vne
   chose laide et deshonneste;" -- "St. Paul, with the view of remedying
   this vice, sets forward quite the reverse of what appeared to them --
   saying, that so far from there being a beauty in this to allure men to
   lust, it is rather a thing that is ugly and unseemly."

   [626] "Pour estre compagne a l'homme, pour viure auec luy, et pour luy
   aider;" -- "To be a companion to the man, to live with him, and to aid
   him."

   [627] "Ainsi que l'oeuure tendant a quelque fin est au dessous de sa
   cause et fin pour laquelle on le fait;" -- "As a work fitted for some
   design is inferior to its cause and the design for which it is made."

   [628] "Doit auoir sur la teste vne enseigne qu'elle est sous
   puissance;" -- "She ought to have upon her head a token that she is
   under authority."

   [629] "Vn argument et consequence;" -- "An argument and inference."

   [630] "I1 y a de mot a mot au Grec, La femme doit auoir puissance sur
   la teste. Mais au mot de puissance il y a une figure appellee
   metonymie;" -- "It is literally in the Greek, The woman ought to have
   power upon her head. But in the word power there is a figure called
   metonymy."

   [631] "C'est la couuerture de teste, soit un chapperon, ou couurechef,
   ou coiffe, ou chose semblable;" -- "It is a covering of the head,
   whether it be a hood, or a kerchief, or a coif, or anything of that
   kind."

   [632] The term exousia (exousia) is considered by Bloomfield to be the
   name of an article of dress of which mention is made in Ruth 3:15, and
   Isaiah 3:23, and consisted of "a piece of cloth of a square form thrown
   over the head and tied under the chin." Granville Penn, on the other
   hand, considers it as nothing more than the (ti) kata kephales in the
   third verse of the chapter -- something on the head, or a covering on
   the head, and notices it as remarkable, that in Wiclif's version (1380)
   the rendering is -- "the woman schal have an hilying on hir heed,"
   which the glossary explains by covering. -- Ed

   [633] "Et sont tousiours a son commandement et seruice;" -- "And are
   always at his commandment and service."

   [634] "Qu'ils n'ayent les femmes en desdain et mocquerie;" -- "That
   they may not hold women in disdain and derision."

   [635] "Par ce lien d'aide et antitie mutuelle;" -- "By this tie of
   mutual assistance and amity."

   [636] "La necessite qui les presse et contraint;" -- "The necessity
   that presses and constrains them."

   [637] "Pensent a leur deuoir, et que de leur coste elles sont obligees
   aux hommes;" -- "Think of their duty, and of their being under
   obligation, on their part, to men."

   [638] It is remarked by President Edwards, that "the emphasis used,
   aute he phusis, nature itself, shows that the Apostle does not mean
   custom, but nature in the proper sense. It is true it was long custom
   that made having the head covered a token of subjection, and a feminine
   habit or appearance, as it is custom that makes any outward action or
   word a sign or signification of anything; but nature itself, nature in
   its proper sense, teaches that it is a shame for a man to appear with
   the established signs of the female sex. Nature itself shows it to be a
   shame for a father to bow down or kneel to his own child or servant,
   because bowing down is, by custom, an established token of subjection
   and submission." Edwards on Original Sin, part 2, chapter 3, section 3.
   -- Ed

   [639] Instances of this occur in Ovid, Fast. 2. 30, and in Hor., Od. 2,
   15, 11. Gaul, to the north of the Alps, was called Gallia comata, from
   the inhabitants wearing their hair long Homer applies to the Greeks in
   his time the epithet of karekomoontes -- long-haired Hom. Il., 2. 11.
   -- Ed

   [640] "I1 appelle Nature ceste coustume desia confermee par vn long
   temps et vsage commun;" -- "He gives the appellation of Nature to this
   custom, already confirmed by length of time and common use."

   [641] "Qui ne se veulent en rien accommoder aux autres;" -- "Who are
   not disposed to accommodate themselves to others in anything." -- The
   Greek word made use of by Calvin here (akoinontos) is employed by
   classical writers to mean -- having no intercourse, or not caring to
   have intercourse with others. See Arist., Top. 3. 2, 8.; Plat. Legg.,
   774 A. -- Ed

   [642] "Et appetit sans raison;" -- "And unreasonable desire."

   [643] "Que ce n'est point la coustume de l'Eglise d'entrer en debats et
   contentions;" -- "That it is not the custom of the Church to enter into
   strifes and contentions."
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 11:17-22

   17. Now in this that I declare unto you I praise you not, that ye come
   together not for the better, but for the worse.

   17. Hoc autem denuntians non laudo, quod non in melius, sed in peius
   convenitis.

   18. For first of all, when ye come together in the church, I hear that
   there be divisions among you; and I partly believe it.

   18. Primum enim, convenientibus vobis in Ecclesiam, audio dissidia
   inter vos esse: et ex parte credo.

   19. For there must be also heresies among you, that they which are
   approved may be made manifest among you.

   19. Oportet enim haereses quoque esse in vobis, ut qui probe sunt,
   manifesti fiant inter vos.

   20. When ye come together therefore into one place, this is not to eat
   the Lord's supper.

   20. Convenientibus ergo vobis in unum, non est Dominicam coenamedere.

   21. For in eating every one taketh before other his own supper: and one
   is hungry, and another is drunken.

   21. Unusquisque enim propriam coenam praesumit edendo: atque hic quidem
   esurit, ille autem ebrius est.

   22. What? have ye not houses to eat and to drink in? or despise ye the
   church of God, and shame them that have not? What shall I say to you?
   shall I praise you in this? I praise you not.

   22. Numquid domos non habetis, ad edendum et bibendum, aut Ecclesiam
   Dei contemnitis, et pudore afficitis eos qui non habent? Quid vobis
   dicam? Laudabo vos in hoc? Non laudo.


   His reproof of the fault previously noticed was but a mild and gentle
   admonition, because the Corinthians sinned in ignorance, so that it was
   proper that they should readily be forgiven. Paul, too, had praised
   them in the outset, because they had faithfully kept his enactments. (1
   Corinthians 11:2.) Now he begins to reprove them more sharply, because
   they offended more grievously in some things, and not through
   ignorance.

   17. But, in warning you as to this, I do not praise. [644] For I
   translate it in this way, because Paul appears to have made the
   participle and the verb change places. [645] I am also not satisfied
   with the interpretation of Erasmus, who takes parangellein as meaning
   to command The verb to warn would suit better, but as to this I do not
   contend. There is an antithesis between this clause and the beginning
   of this chapter. "While I have praised you, do not think that it is
   unqualified commendation; for I have something to find fault with, as
   it is worthy of severe reproof." This, however, in my opinion, does not
   refer exclusively to the Lord's Supper, but also to other faults of
   which he makes mention. Let this then be taken as a general statement,
   that the Corinthians are reproved, because they came together not for
   the better but for the worse. Particular effects of this evil will be
   brought forward afterwards.

   He finds fault with them, then, in the first place, because they come
   not together for the better, -- and secondly, that they come together
   for the worse The second, it is true, is the more serious, but even the
   first is not to be endured, for if we consider what is transacted in
   the Church, there ought never to be a coming together without some
   fruit. There the doctrine of God is listened to, prayers are offered
   up, the Sacraments are administered. The fruit of the Word is, when
   confidence in God and fear of him are increased in us -- when progress
   is made in holiness of life -- when we put off more and more the old
   man, (Colossians 3:9) -- when we advance in newness of life, etc.
   (Romans 6:4.) The Sacraments have a tendency to exercise us in piety
   and love. The prayers, too, ought to be of use for promoting all these
   purposes. In addition to this, the Lord works efficaciously by his
   Spirit, because he wills not that his ordinances should be vain. Hence
   if the sacred assemblies are of no benefit to us, and we are not made
   better by them, it is our ingratitude that is to blame, and therefore
   we deserve to be reproved. For the effect of our conduct is, that those
   things, which, from their own nature, and from God's appointment, ought
   to have been salutary, become unprofitable.

   Then follows the second fault -- that they come together for the worse.
   This is much more criminal, and yet it almost always follows the other,
   for if we derive no advantage from God's benefits, he employs this
   method of punishing our carelessness -- that we are made worse by them.
   It usually happens, too, that negligence gives birth to many
   corruptions, especially on this account, that those who do not observe
   the natural use of things usually fall erelong into hurtful inventions.
   [646]

   18. When ye come together in the Church, I hear there are divisions
   Some take the words divisions and heresies, as referring to that
   disorder (ataxian) of which he speaks soon afterwards. I consider them
   as having a more extensive signification, and certainly it is not
   likely that he would employ terms so improper and unsuitable for the
   purpose of exposing that abuse. [647] For as to their alleging that he
   has expressed himself in more severe terms, with the view of exposing
   more fully the heinousness of the offense, I would readily grant this,
   if the meaning corresponded. It is, then, a reproof of a general kind
   -- that they were not of one accord as becomes Christians, but every
   one was so much taken up with his own interests, that he was not
   prepared to accommodate himself to others. Hence arose that abuse, as
   to which we shall see in a little -- hence sprung ambition and pride,
   so that every one exalted himself and despised others -- hence sprung
   carelessness as to edification -- hence sprung profanation of the gifts
   of God.

   He says that he partly believes it, that they might not think that he
   charged them all with this heinous crime, and might accordingly
   complain, that they were groundlessly accused. In the meantime,
   however, he intimates that this had been brought to him not by mere
   vague rumor, but by credible information, such as he could not
   altogether discredit.

   19. For there must be also heresies He had previously spoken of
   divisions (1 Corinthians 11:18.) Now he uses the term heresies, with
   the view of amplifying the more, as we may infer, too, from the word
   also, for it is added for the sake of amplification. (pros auxesin.) It
   is well known in what sense the ancients used those two terms, [648]
   and what distinction they made between Heretics and Schismatics. [649]
   Heresy they made to consist in disagreement as to doctrine, and schism,
   on the contrary, in alienation of affection, as when any one withdrew
   from the Church from envy, or from dislike of the pastors, or from ill
   nature. It is true, that the Church cannot but be torn asunder by false
   doctrine, and thus heresy is the root and origin of schism, and it is
   also true that envy or pride is the mother of almost all heresies, but
   at the same time it is of advantage to distinguish in this way between
   these two terms.

   But let us see in what sense Paul employs them. I have already
   expressed my disapprobation of those who explain heresy as meaning the
   setting up of a separate table, inasmuch as the rich did not partake of
   their Supper along with the poor; for he had it in view to point out
   something more hateful. But without mentioning the opinions of others,
   I take schism and heresy here in the way of less and greater. Schisms,
   then, are either secret grudges -- when we do not see that agreement
   which ought to subsist among the pious -- when inclinations at variance
   with each other are at work -- when every one is mightily pleased with
   his own way, and finds fault with everything that is done by others.
   Heresies are when the evil proceeds to such a pitch that open hostility
   is discovered, and persons deliberately divide themselves into opposite
   parties. Hence, in order that believers might not feel discouraged on
   seeing the Corinthians torn with divisions, the Apostle turns round
   this occasion of offense in an opposite direction, intimating that the
   Lord does rather by such trials make proof of his people's constancy. A
   lovely consolation! "So far, says he, should we be from being troubled,
   or cast down, when we do not see complete unity in the Church, but on
   the contrary some threatenings of separation from want of proper
   agreement, that even if sects should start up, [650] we ought to remain
   firm and constant. For in this way hypocrites are detected -- in this
   way, on the other hand, the sincerity of believers is tried. For as
   this gives occasion for discovering the fickleness of those who were
   not rooted in the Lord's Word, and the wickedness of those who had
   assumed the appearance of good men, so the good afford a more signal
   manifestation of their constancy and sincerity."

   But observe what Paul says -- there must be, for he intimates by this
   expression, that this state of matters does not happen by chance, but
   by the sure providence of God, because he has it in view to try his
   people, as gold in the furnace, and if it is agreeable to the mind of
   God, it is, consequently, expedient. At the same time, however, we must
   not enter into thorny disputes, or rather into labyrinths as to a fatal
   necessity. We know that there never will be a time when there will not
   be many reprobates. We know that they are governed by the spirit of
   Satan, and are effectually drawn away to what is evil. We know that
   Satan, in his activity, leaves no stone unturned with the view of
   breaking up the unity of the Church. From this -- not from fate --
   comes that necessity of which Paul makes mention. [651] We know, also,
   that the Lord, by his admirable wisdom, turns Satan's deadly
   machinations so as to promote the salvation of believers. [652] Hence
   comes that design of which he speaks -- that the good may shine forth
   more conspicuously; for we ought not to ascribe this advantage to
   heresies, which, being evil, can produce nothing but what is evil, but
   to God, who, by his infinite goodness, changes the nature of things, so
   that those things are salutary to the elect, which Satan had contrived
   for their ruin. As to Chrysostom's contending that the particle that
   (ina) denotes not the cause, but the event, it is of no great moment.
   For the cause is the secret counsel of God, [653] by which things that
   are evil are overruled in such a manner, as to have a good issue. We
   know, in fine, that the wicked are impelled by Satan in such a manner,
   that they both act and are acted upon with the consent of their wills.
   [654] Hence they are without excuse.

   20. This is not to eat the Lord's supper He now reproves the abuse that
   had crept in among the Corinthians as to the Lord's Supper, in respect
   of their mixing up profane banquets with the sacred and spiritual
   feast, and that too with contempt of the poor. Paul says, that in this
   way it is not the Lord's supper that is partaken of -- not that a
   single abuse altogether set aside the sacred institution of Christ, and
   reduced it to nothing, but that they polluted the sacrament by
   observing it in a wrong way. For we are accustomed to say, in common
   conversation, that a thing is not done at all, if it is not done
   aright. Now this was no trivial abuse, as we shall afterwards see. If
   you understand the words is not as meaning, is not allowable, [655] the
   meaning will amount to the same thing -- that the Corinthians were not
   in a state of preparation for partaking of the Lord's supper, as being
   in so divided a state. What I stated a little ago, however, is more
   simple -- that he condemns that profane admixture, which had nothing in
   it akin to the Lord's Supper.

   21. For every one of you taketh before others his own supper. It is
   truly wonderful, and next to a miracle, [656] that Satan could have
   accomplished so much in so short a time. We are, however, admonished by
   this instance, how much antiquity, without reason on its side, can
   effect, or, in other words, how much influence a long continued custom
   has, while not sanctioned by a single declaration of the word of God.
   This, having become customary, was looked upon as lawful. Paul was then
   at hand to interfere. What then must have been the state of matters
   after the death of the Apostles? With what liberty Satan must have
   sported himself. [657] Yet here is the great strength of Papists: "The
   thing is ancient -- it was done long ago -- let it, therefore, have the
   weight of a revelation from heaven."

   It is uncertain, however, what was the origin of this abuse, or what
   was the occasion of its springing up so soon. Chrysostom is of opinion,
   that it originated in the love-feasts, [658] (apo ton agapon) and that,
   while the rich had been accustomed [659] to bring with them from their
   houses the means of feasting with the poor indiscriminately and in
   common, they afterwards began to exclude the poor, and to guzzle over
   their delicacies by themselves. And, certainly, it appears from
   Tertullian, that that custom was a very ancient one. [660] Now they
   gave the name of Agapae [661] to those common entertainments, which
   they contrived among themselves, as being tokens of fraternal
   affection, and consisted of alms. Nor have I any doubt, that it took
   its rise from sacrificial rites commonly observed both by Jews and
   Gentiles. For I observe that Christians, for the most part, corrected
   the faults connected with those rites, in such a manner, as to retain
   at the same time some resemblance. Hence it is probable, that, on
   observing that both Jews and Gentiles added a feast to their sacrifice,
   as an appendage to it, but that both of them sinned in respect of
   ambition, luxury, and intemperance, they instituted [662] a kind of
   banquet, which might accustom them rather to sobriety and frugality,
   [663] and might, at the same time, be in accordance with a spiritual
   entertainment in respect of mutual fellowship. For in it the poor were
   entertained at the expense of the rich, and the table was open to all.
   But, whether they had from the very first fallen into this profane
   abuse, or whether an institution, otherwise not so objectionable, had
   in this way degenerated in process of time, Paul would have them in no
   way mix up this spiritual banquet with common feasts. "This, indeed,
   looks well -- that the poor along with the rich partake in common of
   the provisions that have been brought, and that the rich share of their
   abundance along with the needy, but nothing ought to have such weight
   with us as to lead us to profane the holy sacrament." [664]

   And one is hungry This was one evil in the case, that while the rich
   indulged themselves sumptuously, they appeared, in a manner, to
   reproach the poor for their poverty. The inequality he describes
   hyperbolically, when he says, that some are drunken and others are
   hungry, for some had the means of stuffing themselves well, while
   others had slender fare. Thus the poor were exposed to the derision of
   the rich, or at least they were exposed to shame. It was, therefore, an
   unseemly spectacle, and not in accordance with the Lord's supper

   22. Have ye not houses? From this we see that the Apostle was utterly
   dissatisfied with this custom of feasting, even though the abuse
   formerly mentioned had not existed. For, though it seems allowable for
   the whole Church to partake at one common table, yet this, on the other
   hand, is wrong -- to convert a sacred assembly to purposes foreign to
   its nature. We know for what exercises a Church should assemble -- to
   hear doctrine, to pour forth prayers, and sing hymns to God, to observe
   the sacraments, [665] to make confession of their faith, and to engage
   in pious observances, and other exercises of piety. If anything else is
   done there, it is out of place. Every one has his own house appointed
   him for eating and drinking, and hence that is an unseemly thing in a
   sacred assembly.

   What shall I say to you? Having fitly stated the case, he now calls
   them to consider, whether they are worthy to be praised, for they could
   not defend an abuse that was so manifest. He presses them still
   further, by asking -- "What else could I do? Will you say that you are
   unjustly reproved?" Some manuscripts connect the words in this with the
   verb that follows -- in this way: Shall I praise you? In this I do not
   praise you [666] The other reading, however, is the more generally
   received among the Greeks, and it suits better.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [644] "Or ie vous rememore ceci, non point eu louant. I1 y a au Grec
   mot; a mot. Or rememorant ie ne loue point;" -- "But I put you in, mind
   of this, not praising you for it. It is literally in the Greek: But
   putting you in mind I do not praise."

   [645] In explanation of this remark, let it be observed that the
   reading in the Alexandrine MS. is as follows: Touto de parangello ouk
   epainon -- But I warn you as to this, not praising. This reading is
   followed in the Latin and Syrian versions. In Wiclif (1380) the
   rendering is: "But this thing I comaunde, not preisynge." In Rheims
   (1582) -- "And this I commaund; not praising it." -- Ed

   [646] "Principalement pource que ceux qui ne regardent pas a tenir le
   droit et naturel usage des choses, sont suiets a tomber incontinent en
   beaucoup d'inuentions peruerses et dangereuses;" -- "Chiefly because
   those who do not take care to observe the right and natural use of
   things, are liable to fall straightway into many perverse and dangerous
   inventions."

   [647] "Qu'il leur remonstrera qu'ils fout en la Cene;" -- "Which he
   will show that they have fallen into as to the Supper."

   [648] "Schisme et Heresie;" -- "Schism and Heresy."

   [649] "Voyez l'Institution;" -- "See my Institutes," (volume 3.)

   [650] "De tous costez;" -- "On all sides."

   [651] "De la vient ceste necessite de laquelle S. Paul fait mention, et
   non pas de ce Fatum que les Stoiques ont imagine, que l'on nomme
   communeement Destinee. Voyez l' Institution;" -- "From this comes that
   necessity of which St. Paul makes mention, and not from that Fate of
   which the Stoics have dreamed, and which is commonly called destiny.
   See the Institutes." (Volume 1, p. 241.)

   [652] "Conuertit au profit et salut des fideles les machinations de
   Satan horribles et pernicieuses;" -- "Turns the horrible and pernicious
   machinations of Satan to the advantage and salvation of believers."

   [653] "Car a parlet proprement, la cause de ceci depend du secret
   conseil de Dieu;" -- "For, properly speaking, the cause of this depends
   on the secret counsel of God."

   [654] "Ce qu'ils font, et ce que Satan lear fait faire, ils le font
   volontairement, et non point par force;" -- "What they do, and what
   Satan makes them do, they do voluntarily, and not from force."

   [655] Paraeus and some others take the words ouk esti is not, as used
   for, ouk exesti is not allowable. -- Ed

   [656] "Quasi incroyable;" -- "As it were incredible."

   [657] "A ioue ses tours;" -- "Have played off his tricks."

   [658] "Vne sorte de banquets qui se faisoyent par charite;" -- "A kind
   of banquets that were held, by way of love."

   [659] "Premierement;" -- "At first."

   [660] Pliny is supposed to refer to the Agapai (love-feasts) in his
   97^th letter to Trajan, where he says of the Christians in Blthynia, of
   which he was governor, that, upon examination, they affirmed, that
   after having taken their sacramenturn -- "morem sibi discedendi fuisse,
   rursusque coeundi ad capiendum cibum, promiscuum tamen et innoxium;" --
   "it was customary for them to depart, and come together again for the
   purpose of taking an innocent repast in common." -- Ed

   [661] "Agapas, c'est a dire Charitez;" -- "Agapae, that is to say --
   Loves."

   [662] "Par succession de temps;" -- "In process of time."

   [663] "Qu'autrement;" -- "Than otherwise."

   [664] "Mais il n'y a consideration aucune qui nous doyue tant
   esmouuoir, que pour cela nous venions a profaner ce sainct mystere;" --
   "But there is no consideration that should have so much influence over
   us, that we should come, on that account, to profane this holy
   sacrament."

   [665] "Pour receuoir et administrer los sacrements;" -- "To receive and
   administer the sacraments."

   [666] The earlier English versions follow this reading. Thus Wiclif,
   (1380) -- What schal I seie to zou? I preise zou: but hereynne I preise
   zou not; Tyndale, (1534) -- What shall I saye unto you? Shall I prayse
   you: In this prayse I you not; Cranmer, (1539) -- What shall I saye
   unto you? Shall I prayse you? In this prayse I you, not. -- Ed.
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 11:23-29

   23. For I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto
   you, That the Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed took
   bread:

   23. Ego enim accepi a Domino, quod etiam tradidi vobis: quod Dominus
   Iesus nocte qua traditus est, accepit panem:

   24. And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat:
   this is my body, which is broken for you: this do in remembrance of me.

   24. Et gratiis actis, fregit, et dixit, Accipite, edite: hoc est corpus
   meum quod pro vobis frangitur: hoc facite in mei memoriam.

   25. After the same manner also he took the cup, when he had supped,
   saying, This cup is the new testament in my blood: this do ye, as oft
   as ye drink it, in remembrance of me.

   25. Similiter et calicem, postquam vum testamentum est in sanguine meo:
   hoc facite, quotiescunque biberitis, in mei memoriam.

   26. For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do shew
   the Lord's death till he come.

   26. Quotiescumque enim ederitis panem hunc, et biberitis hunc calicem,
   mortem Domini annuntiabitis, donce veniat.

   27. Wherefore, whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of
   the Lord, unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the
   Lord.

   27. Itaque quisquis ederit panem hunc, aut biberit calicem Domini
   indigne, reus erit corporis et sanguinis Domini.

   28. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread,
   and drink of that cup.

   28. Probet autem homo se ipsum, et sic de pane illo edat, et de calice
   bibat.

   29. For he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh
   damnation to himself, not discerning the Lord's body.

   29. Qui enim ederit aut biberit indigne, iudicium sibi edit ac bibit,
   non discernens corpus Domini.


   Hitherto he has been exposing the abuse; [667] now he proceeds to show
   what is the proper method of rectifying it. For the institution of
   Christ is a sure rule, so that if you turn aside from it but a very
   little, you are out of the right course. Hence, as the Corinthians had
   deviated from this rule, he calls them back to it. It is a passage that
   ought to be carefully observed, as showing that there is no remedy for
   correcting and purging out abuses, short of a return to God's pure
   institution. Thus the Lord himself -- when he was discoursing
   respecting marriage, (Matthew 19:3,) and the Scribes brought forward
   custom, and also the permission given by Moses -- simply brings forward
   his Father's institution, as being an inviolable law. When we do this
   at the present day, the Papists cry out, that we are leaving nothing
   untouched. [668] We openly demonstrate, that it is not in one point
   merely that they have degenerated from our Lord's first institution,
   but that they have corrupted it in a thousand ways. Nothing is more
   manifest than that their Mass is diametrically opposed to the sacred
   Supper of our Lord. I go farther -- we show in the plainest manner,
   that it is full of wicked abominations: hence there is need of
   reformation. We demand -- what it appears Paul had recourse to -- that
   our Lord's institution be the common rule, to which we agree on both
   sides to make our appeal. This they oppose with all their might. Mark
   then the nature of the controversy at this day in reference to the
   Lord's Supper.

   23 I received from the Lord. In these words he intimates, that there is
   no authority that is of any avail in the Church, but that of the Lord
   alone. "I have not delivered to you an invention of my own: I had not,
   when I came to you, contrived a new kind of Supper, according to my own
   humor, but have Christ as my authority, from whom I received what I
   have delivered unto you, in the way of handing it over." [669] Return,
   then, to the original source. Thus, bidding adieu to human laws, the
   authority of Christ will be maintained in its stability.

   That night in which he was betrayed. This circumstance as to time
   instructs us as to the design of the sacrament -- that the benefit of
   Christ's death may be ratified in us. For the Lord might have some time
   previously committed to the Apostles this covenant-seal, [670] but he
   waited until the time of his oblation, that the Apostles might see soon
   after accomplished in reality in his body, what he had represented to
   them in the bread and the wine Should any one infer from this, that the
   Supper ought, therefore, to be celebrated at night and after a bodily
   repast, I answer, that, in what our Lord did, we must consider what
   there is that he would have to be done by us. It is certain, that he
   did not mean to institute a kind of nightly festival, like that in
   honor of Ceres, [671] and farther, that it was not his design to invite
   his people to come to this spiritual banquet with a well-filled
   stomach. Such actions of Christ as are not intended for our imitation,
   should not be reckoned as belonging to his institution. [672] In this
   way, there is no difficulty in setting aside that subtilty of Papists,
   by which they shift off [673] what I have already stated as to the duty
   of maintaining and preserving Christ's institution in its simplicity.
   "We will, therefore," say they, "not receive the Lord's Supper except
   at night, and we will therefore take it -- not when fasting, but after
   having dined." All this, I say, is mere trifling; for it is easy to
   distinguish what our Lord did, in order that we might imitate it, or
   rather what he did with the view of commanding us to do the like.

   24. Having given thanks. Paul observes elsewhere, that every gift that
   we receive from the hand of God

   is sanctified to us by the word and prayer. (1 Timothy 4:5.)

   Accordingly, we nowhere read that the Lord tasted bread along with his
   disciples, but there is mention made of his giving thanks, (John 6:23,)
   by which example he has assuredly instructed us to do the like. This
   giving of thanks, however, has a reference to something higher, for
   Christ gives thanks to the Father for his mercy [674] towards the human
   race, and the inestimable benefit of redemption; and he invites us, by
   his example, to raise up our minds as often as we approach the sacred
   table, to an acknowledgment of the boundless love of God towards us,
   and to have our minds kindled up to true gratitude. [675]

   Take, eat, this is my body As Paul designed here to instruct us in a
   few words as to the right use of the sacrament, it is our duty to
   consider attentively [676] what he sets before us, and allow nothing to
   pass unobserved, inasmuch as he says nothing but what is exceedingly
   necessary to be known, and worthy of the closest attention. In the
   first place, we must take notice, that Christ here distributes the
   bread among the Apostles, that all may partake of it in common, and
   thus every one may receive his portion, that there may be an equal
   participation among all. Accordingly, when there is not a table in
   common prepared for all the pious -- where they are not invited to the
   breaking of bread in common, and where, in fine, believers do not
   mutually participate, it is to no purpose that the name of the Lord's
   Supper is laid claim to.

   But for what purpose [677] are the people called to mass, unless it be
   that they may come away empty from an unmeaning show? [678] It has,
   therefore, nothing in unison with the supper. Hence, too, we infer that
   Christ's promise is no more applicable to the mass than to the feast of
   the Salii; [679] for when Christ promises that he will give us his
   body, he at the same time commands us to take and eat of the bread
   Hence, unless we obey this command, it is to no purpose that we glory
   in his promise. To explain this more familiarly in other words -- the
   promise is annexed to the commandment in a conditional way, as it were:
   hence it has its accomplishment only if the condition also is
   accomplished. For example, it is written, Call upon me; I will answer
   thee (Psalm 91:15.) It is our part to obey the command of God, that he
   may accomplish for us what he promises; otherwise we shut ourselves out
   from the accomplishment of it. [680]

   What do Papists do? They neglect participation, and consecrate the
   bread for a totally different purpose, and in the meantime they boast
   that they have the Lord's body. While, by a wicked divorce, they

   put asunder those things which Christ has joined together,
   (Matthew 19:6,)

   it is manifest that their boasting is vain. Hence, whenever they bring
   forward the clause -- This is my body, we must retort upon them the one
   that immediately precedes it -- Take and eat For the meaning of the
   words is: "By participating in the breaking of bread, according to the
   order and observance which I have prescribed, you shall be participants
   also in my body." Hence, when an individual eats of it by himself, the
   promise in that case goes for nothing. Besides, we are taught in these
   words what the Lord would have us do. Take, says he. Hence those that
   offer a sacrifice to God have some other than Christ as their
   authority, for we are not instructed in these words to perform a
   sacrifice.

   But what do Papists say as to their mass? At first they were so
   impudent as to maintain, that it was truly and properly called a
   sacrifice. Now, however, they admit that it is indeed a commemorative
   sacrifice, but in such a way, that the benefit of redemption is,
   through means of their daily oblation, [681] applied to the living and
   the dead. However that may be, they present the appearance of a
   sacrifice. [682] In the first place, there is rashness in this, as
   being without any command from Christ; but there is a still more
   serious error involved in it -- that, while Christ appointed the Supper
   for this purpose, that we might take and eat, they pervert it to a
   totally different use.

   This is my body I shall not recount the unhappy contests that have
   tried the Church in our times as to the meaning of these words. Nay
   rather, would to God that we could bury the remembrance of them in
   perpetual oblivion! I shall state, first of all, sincerely and without
   disguise, and then farther, I shall state freely (as I am wont to do)
   what my views are. Christ calls the bread his body; for I set aside,
   without any disputation, that absurd contrivance, that our Lord did not
   exhibit the bread to the Apostles, but his body, which they beheld with
   their eyes, for it immediately follows -- This cup is the New Testament
   in my blood Let us regard it then as beyond all controversy that Christ
   is here speaking of the bread. Now the question is -- "In what sense?"
   That we may elicit the true meaning, we must hold that the expression
   is figurative; for, assuredly, to deny this is exceedingly dishonest.
   [683] Why then is the term body applied to the bread? All, I think,
   will allow that it is for the same reason that John calls the Holy
   Spirit a dove (John 1:32.) Thus far we are agreed. Now the reason why
   the Spirit was so called was this -- that he had appeared in the form
   of a dove. Hence the name of the Spirit is transferred to the visible
   sign. Why should we not maintain that there is here a similar instance
   of metonymy, and that the term body is applied to the bread, as being
   the sign and symbol of it? If any are of a different opinion they will
   forgive me; but it appears to me to be an evidence of a contentious
   spirit, to dispute pertinaciously on this point. I lay it down, then,
   as a settled point, that there is here a sacramental form of
   expression, [684] in which the Lord gives to the sign the name of the
   thing signified.

   We must now proceed farther, and inquire as to the reason of the
   metonymy. Here I reply, that the name of the thing signified is not
   applied to the sign simply as being a representation of it, but rather
   as being a symbol of it, [685] by which the reality is presented to us.
   For I do not allow the force of those comparisons which some borrow
   from profane or earthly things; for there is a material difference
   between them and the sacraments of our Lord. The statue of Hercules is
   called Hercules, but what have we there but a bare, empty
   representation? On the other hand the Spirit is called a dove, as being
   a sure pledge of the invisible presence of the Spirit. Hence the bread
   is Christ's body, because it assuredly testifies, that the body which
   it represents is held forth to us, or because the Lord, by holding out
   to us that symbol, gives us at the same time his own body; for Christ
   is not a deceiver, to mock us with empty representations. [686] Hence
   it is regarded by me as beyond all controversy, that the reality is
   here conjoined with the sign; or, in other words, that we do not less
   truly become participants in Christ's body in respect of spiritual
   efficacy, than we partake of the bread.

   We must now discuss the manner. Papists hold forth to us their system
   of transubstantiation: they allege that, when the act of consecration
   has been gone through, the substance of the bread no longer exists, and
   that nothing remains but the accidents. [687] To this contrivance we
   oppose -- not merely the plain words of Scripture, but the very nature
   of the sacraments. For what is the meaning of the supper, if there is
   no correspondence between the visible sign and the spiritual reality?
   They would have the sign to be a false and delusive appearance of
   bread. What then will the thing signified be, but a mere imagination?
   Hence, if there must be a correspondence between the sign and its
   reality, it is necessary that the bread be real -- not imaginary -- to
   represent Christ's real body. Besides, Christ's body is here given us
   not simply, but as food. Now it is not by any means the color of the
   bread that nourishes us, but the substance. In fine, if we would have
   reality in the thing itself, there must be no deception in the sign.

   Rejecting then the dream of Papists, let us see in what manner Christ's
   body is given to us. Some explain, that it is given to us, when we are
   made partakers of all the blessings which Christ has procured for us in
   his body -- when, I say, we by faith embrace Christ as crucified for
   us, and raised up from the dead, and in this way are effectually made
   partakers of all his benefits. As for those who are of this opinion, I
   have no objection to their holding such a view. As for myself, I
   acknowledge, that it is only when we obtain Christ himself, that we
   come to partake of Christ's benefits. He is, however, obtained, I
   affirm, not only when we believe that he was made an offering for us,
   but when he dwells in us -- when he is one with us -- when we are
   members of his flesh, (Ephesians 5:30,) -- when, in fine, we are
   incorporated with him (so to speak) into one life and substance.
   Besides, I attend to the import of the words, for Christ does not
   simply present to us the benefit of his death and resurrection, but the
   very body in which he suffered and rose again. I conclude, that
   Christ's body is really, (as the common expression is,) -- that is,
   truly given to us in the Supper, to be wholesome food for our souls. I
   use the common form of expression, but my meaning is, that our souls
   are nourished by the substance of the body, that we may truly be made
   one with him, or, what amounts to the same thing, that a life-giving
   virtue from Christ's flesh is poured into us by the Spirit, though it
   is at a great distance from us, and is not mixed with us. [688]

   There now remains but one difficulty -- how is it possible that his
   body, which is in heaven, is given to us here upon earth? Some imagine
   that Christ's body is infinite, and is not confined to any one space,
   but fills heaven and earth, (Jeremiah 23:24,) like his Divine essence.
   This fancy is too absurd to require refutation. The Schoolmen dispute
   with more refinement as to his glorious body. Their whole doctrine,
   however, reduces itself to this -- that Christ is to be sought after in
   the bread, as if he were included in it. Hence it comes, that the minds
   of men behold the bread with wonderment, and adore it in place of
   Christ. Should any one ask them whether they adore the bread, or the
   appearance of it, they will confidently agree that they do not, but, in
   the mean time, when about to adore Christ, they turn to the bread. They
   turn, I say, not merely with their eyes, and their whole body, but even
   with the thoughts of the heart. Now what is this but unmixed idolatry?
   But that participation in the body of Christ, which, I affirm, is
   presented to us in the Supper, does not require a local presence, nor
   the descent of Christ, nor infinite extension, [689] nor anything of
   that nature, for the Supper being a heavenly action, there is no
   absurdity in saying, that Christ, while remaining in heaven, is
   received by us. For as to his communicating himself to us, that is
   effected through the secret virtue of his Holy Spirit, which can not
   merely bring together, but join in one, things that are separated by
   distance of place, and far remote.

   But, in order that we may be capable of this participation, we must
   rise heavenward. Here, therefore, faith must be our resource, when all
   the bodily senses have failed. When I speak of faith, I do not mean any
   sort of opinion, resting on human contrivances, as many, boasting of
   faith on all occasions, run grievously wild on this point. What then?
   You see bread -- nothing more -- but you learn that it is a symbol
   [690] of Christ's body. Do not doubt that the Lord accomplishes what
   his words intimate -- that the body, which thou dost not at all behold,
   is given to thee, as a spiritual repast. It seems incredible, that we
   should be nourished by Christ's flesh, which is at so great a distance
   from us. Let us bear in mind, that it is a secret and wonderful work of
   the Holy Spirit, which it were criminal to measure by the standard of
   our understanding. "In the meantime, however, drive away gross
   imaginations, which would keep thee from looking beyond the bread.
   Leave to Christ the true nature of flesh, and do not, by a mistaken
   apprehension, extend his body over heaven and earth: do not divide him
   into different parts by thy fancies, and do not adore him in this place
   and that, according to thy carnal apprehension. Allow him to remain in
   his heavenly glory, and aspire thou thither, [691] that he may thence
   communicate himself to thee." These few things will satisfy those that
   are sound and modest. As for the curious, I would have them look
   somewhere else for the means of satisfying their appetite.

   Which is broken for you Some explain this as referring to the
   distribution of the bread, because it was necessary that Christ's body
   should remain entire, as it had been predicted, (Exodus 12:46,) A bone
   of him shall not be broken As for myself -- while I acknowledge that
   Paul makes an allusion to the breaking of bread, yet I understand the
   word broken as used here for sacrificed -- not, indeed, with strict
   propriety, but at the same time without any absurdity. For although no
   bone was broken, yet the body itself having been subjected, first of
   all, to so many tortures and inflictions, and afterwards to the
   punishment of death in the most cruel form, cannot be said to have been
   uninjured. This is what Paul means by its being broken This, however,
   is the second clause of the promise, which ought not to be passed over
   slightly. For the Lord does not present his body to us simply, and
   without any additional consideration, but as having been sacrificed for
   us. The first clause, then, intimates, that the body is presented to
   us: this second clause teaches us, what advantage we derive from it --
   that we are partakers of redemption, and the benefit of his sacrifice
   is applied to us. Hence the Supper is a mirror which represents to us
   Christ crucified, so that no one can profitably and advantageously
   receive the supper, but the man who embraces Christ crucified.

   Do this in remembrance of me. Hence the Supper is a memorial,
   (mnemosunon [692] ) appointed as a help to our weakness; for if we were
   sufficiently mindful of the death of Christ, this help would be
   unnecessary. This is common to all sacraments, for they are helps to
   our weakness. What is the nature of that remembrance which Christ would
   have us cherish with regard to him, we shall hear presently. As to the
   inference, however, which some draw from this -- that Christ is not
   present in the Supper, because a remembrance applies to something that
   is absent; the answer is easy -- that Christ is absent from it in the
   sense in which the Supper is a commemoration. For Christ is not visibly
   present, and is not beheld with our eyes, as the symbols are which
   excite our remembrance by representing him. In short, in order that he
   may be present with us, he does not change his place, but communicates
   to us from heaven the virtue of his flesh, as though it were present.
   [693]

   25. The cup, when he had supped The Apostle seems to intimate, that
   there was some interval of time between the distribution of the bread
   and that of the cup, and it does not quite appear from the Evangelists
   whether the whole of the transaction was continuous. [694] This,
   however, is of no great moment, for it may be that the Lord delivered
   in the meantime some address, after distributing the bread, and before
   giving the cup. As, however, he did or said nothing that was not in
   harmony with the sacrament, we need not say that the administration of
   it was disturbed or interrupted. I would not, however, render it as
   Erasmus does -- supper, being ended, for, in a matter of so great
   importance, ambiguity ought to be avoided.

   This cup is the New Testament What is affirmed as to the cup, is
   applicable also to the bread; and thus, by this form of expression, he
   intimates what he had before stated more briefly -- that the bread is
   the body. For it is so to us, that it may be a testament in his body,
   that is, a covenant, which has been once confirmed by the offering up
   of his body, and is now confirmed by eating, when believers feast upon
   that sacrifice. Accordingly, while Paul and Luke use the words --
   testament in the blood, Matthew and Mark employ the expression -- blood
   of the testament, which amounts to the same thing. For the blood was
   poured out to reconcile us to God, and now we drink of it in a
   spiritual sense, that we may be partakers of reconciliation. Hence, in
   the Supper, we have both a covenant, and a confirmatory pledge of the
   covenant.

   I shall speak in [25]the Epistle to the Hebrews, if the Lord shall
   allow me opportunity, as to the word testament It is well known,
   however, that sacraments receive that name, from being testimonies to
   us of the divine will, to confirm [695] it in our minds. For as a
   covenant is entered into among men with solemn rites, so it is in the
   same manner that the Lord deals with us. Nor is it without strict
   propriety that this term is employed; for in consequence of the
   connection between the word and the sign, the covenant of the Lord is
   really included in the sacraments, and the term covenant has a
   reference or relation to us. This will be of no small importance for
   understanding the nature of the sacraments; for if they are covenants,
   then they contain promises, by which consciences may be roused up to an
   assurance of salvation. Hence it follows, that they are not merely
   outward signs of profession before men, but are inwardly, too, helps to
   faith.

   This do, as often as ye drink Christ, then, has appointed a two-fold
   sign in the Supper.

   What God hath joined together let not man put asunder.
   (Matthew 19:6.)

   To distribute, therefore, the bread without the cup, is to man Christ's
   institution. [696] For we hear Christ's words. As he commands us to eat
   of the bread, so he commands us to drink of the cup To obey the one
   half of the command and neglect the other half -- what is this but to
   make sport of his commandment? And to keep back the people from that
   cup, which Christ sets before all, after first drinking of it, as is
   done under the tyranny of the Pope -- who can deny that this is
   diabolical presumption? As to the cavil that they bring forward -- that
   Christ spoke merely to the Apostles, and not to the common people -- it
   is exceedingly childish, and is easily refuted from this passage -- for
   Paul here addresses himself to men and women indiscriminately, and to
   the whole body of the Church. He declares that he

   had delivered this to them agreeably to the commandment
   of the Lord. (1 Corinthians 11:23.)

   By what spirit will those pretend to be actuated, who have dared to set
   aside this ordinance? Yet even at this day this gross abuse is
   obstinately defended; and what occasion is there for wonder, if they
   endeavor impudently to excuse, by words and writings, what they so
   cruelly maintain by fire and sword?

   26. For as often as ye shall eat. Paul now adds what kind of
   remembrance ought to be cherished -- that is, with thanksgiving; not
   that the remembrance consists wholly in confession with the mouth; for
   the chief thing is, that the efficacy of Christ's death be sealed in
   our consciences; but this knowledge should stir us up to a confession
   in respect of praise, so as to declare before men what we feel inwardly
   before God. The Supper then is (so to speak) a kind of memorial, which
   must always remain in the Church, until the last coming of Christ; and
   it has been appointed for this purpose, that Christ may put us in mind
   of the benefit of his death, and that we may recognize it [697] before
   men. Hence it has the name of the Eucharist. [698] If, therefore, you
   would celebrate the Supper aright, you must bear in mind, that a
   profession of your faith is required from you. Hence we see how
   shamelessly those mock God, who boast that they have in the mass
   something of the nature of the Supper. For what is the mass? They
   confess (for I am not speaking of Papists, but of the pretended
   followers of Nicodemus) that it is full of abominable superstitions. By
   outward gesture they give a pretended approval of them. What kind of
   showing forth of the death of Christ is this? Do they not rather
   renounce it?

   Until he come As we always need a help of this kind, so long as we are
   in this world, Paul intimates that this commemoration has been given us
   in charge, until Christ come to judgment. For as he is not present with
   us in a visible form, it is necessary for us to have some symbol of his
   presence, by which our minds may exercise themselves.

   27. Therefore he who shall eat this bread unworthily. If the Lord
   requires gratitude from us in the receiving of this sacrament -- if he
   would have us acknowledge his grace with the heart, and publish it with
   the mouth -- that man will not go unpunished, who has put insult upon
   him rather than honor; for the Lord will not allow his commandment to
   be despised. Now, if we would catch the meaning of this declaration, we
   must know what it is to eat unworthily Some restrict it to the
   Corinthians, and the abuse that had crept in among them, but I am of
   opinion that Paul here, according to his usual manner, passed on from
   the particular case to a general statement, or from one instance to an
   entire class. There was one fault that prevailed among the Corinthians.
   He takes occasion from this to speak of every kind of faulty
   administration or reception of the Supper. "God," says he, "will not
   allow this sacrament to be profaned without punishing it severely."

   To eat unworthily, then, is to pervert the pure and right use of it by
   our abuse of it. Hence there are various degrees of this unworthiness,
   so to speak; and some offend more grievously, others less so. Some
   fornicator, perhaps, or perjurer, or drunkard, or cheat, (1 Corinthians
   5:11,) intrudes himself without repentance. As such downright contempt
   is a token of wanton insult against Christ, there can be no doubt that
   such a person, whoever he is, receives the Supper to his own
   destruction. Another, perhaps, will come forward, who is not addicted
   to any open or flagrant vice, but at the same time not so prepared in
   heart as became him. As this carelessness or negligence is a sign of
   irreverence, it is also deserving of punishment from God. As, then,
   there are various degrees of unworthy participation, so the Lord
   punishes some more slightly; on others he inflicts severer punishment.

   Now this passage gave rise to a question, which some afterwards
   agitated with too much keenness -- whether the unworthy really partake
   of the Lord's body? For some were led, by the heat of controversy, so
   far as to say, that it was received indiscriminately by the good and
   the bad; and many at this day maintain pertinaciously, and most
   clamorously, that in the first Supper Peter received no more than
   Judas. It is, indeed, with reluctance, that I dispute keenly with any
   one on this point, which is (in my opinion) not an essential one; but
   as others allow themselves, without reason, to pronounce, with a
   magisterial air, whatever may seem good to them, and to launch out
   thunderbolts upon every one that mutters anything to the contrary, we
   will be excused, if we calmly adduce reasons in support of what we
   reckon to be true.

   I hold it, then, as a settled point, and will not allow myself to be
   driven from it, that Christ cannot be disjoined from his Spirit. Hence
   I maintain, that his body is not received as dead, or even inactive,
   disjoined from the grace and power of his Spirit. I shall not occupy
   much time in proving this statement. Now in what way could the man who
   is altogether destitute of a living faith and repentance, having
   nothing of the Spirit of Christ, [699] receive Christ himself? Nay
   more, as he is entirely under the influence of Satan and sin, how will
   he be capable of receiving Christ? While, therefore, I acknowledge that
   there are some who receive Christ truly in the Supper, and yet at the
   same time unworthily, as is the case with many weak persons, yet I do
   not admit, that those who bring with them a mere historical faith,
   [700] without a lively feeling of repentance and faith, receive
   anything but the sign. For I cannot endure to maim Christ, [701] and I
   shudder at the absurdity of affirming that he gives himself to be eaten
   by the wicked in a lifeless state, as it were. Nor does Augustine mean
   anything else when he says, that the wicked receive Christ merely in
   the sacrament, which he expresses more clearly elsewhere, when he says
   that the other Apostles ate the bread -- the Lord; but Judas only the
   bread of the Lord [702]

   But here it is objected, that the efficacy of the sacraments does not
   depend upon the worthiness of men, and that nothing is taken away from
   the promises of God, or falls to the ground, through the wickedness of
   men. This I acknowledge, and accordingly I add in express terms, that
   Christ's body is presented to the wicked no less than to the good, and
   this is enough so far as concerns the efficacy of the sacrament and the
   faithfulness of God. For God does not there represent in a delusive
   manner, to the wicked, the body of his Son, but presents it in reality;
   nor is the bread a bare sign to them, but a faithful pledge. As to
   their rejection of it, that does not impair or alter anything as to the
   nature of the sacrament.

   It remains, that we give a reply to the statement of Paul in this
   passage. "Paul represents the unworthy as guilty, inasmuch as they do
   not discern the Lord's body: it follows, that they receive his body." I
   deny the inference; for though they reject it, yet as they profane it
   and treat it with dishonor when it is presented to them, they are
   deservedly held guilty; for they do, as it were, cast it upon the
   ground, and trample it under their feet. Is such sacrilege trivial?
   Thus I see no difficulty in Paul's words, provided you keep in view
   what God presents and holds out to the wicked -- not what they receive.

   28. But let a man examine himself An exhortation drawn from the
   foregoing threatening. "If those that eat unworthily are guilty of the
   body and blood of the Lord, then let no man approach who is not
   properly and duly prepared. Let every one, therefore, take heed to
   himself, that he may not fall into this sacrilege through idleness or
   carelessness." But now it is asked, what sort of examination, that
   ought to be to which Paul exhorts us. Papists make it consist in
   auricular confession. They order all that are to receive the Supper, to
   examine their life carefully and anxiously, that they may unburden all
   their sins in the ear of the priest. Such is their preparation! [703] I
   maintain, however, that this holy examination of which Paul speaks, is
   widely different from torture. Those persons, [704] after having
   tortured themselves with reflection for a few hours, and making the
   priest -- such as he is -- privy to their vileness, [705] imagine that
   they have done their duty. It is an examination of another sort that
   Paul here requires -- one of such a kind as may accord with the
   legitimate use of the sacred Supper.

   You see here a method that is most easily apprehended. If you would
   wish to use aright the benefit afforded by Christ, bring faith and
   repentance. As to these two things, therefore, the trial must be made,
   if you would come duly prepared. Under repentance I include love; for
   the man who has learned to renounce himself, that he may give himself
   up wholly to Christ and his service, will also, without doubt,
   carefully maintain that unity which Christ has enjoined. At the same
   time, it is not a perfect faith or repentance that is required, as
   some, by urging beyond due bounds, a perfection that can nowhere be
   found, would shut out for ever from the Supper every individual of
   mankind. If, however, thou aspirest after the righteousness of God with
   the earnest desire of thy mind, and, trembled under a view of thy
   misery, dost wholly lean upon Christ's grace, and rest upon it, know
   that thou art a worthy guest to approach the table -- worthy I mean in
   this respect, that the Lord does not exclude thee, though in another
   point of view there is something in thee that is not as it ought to be.
   For faith, when it is but begun, makes those worthy who were unworthy.

   29. He who shall eat unworthily, eateth judgment to himself. He had
   previously pointed out in express terms the heinousness of the crime,
   when he said that those who should eat unworthily would be guilty of
   the body and blood of the Lord Now he alarms them, by denouncing
   punishment; [706] for there are many that are not affected with the sin
   itself; unless they are struck down by the judgment of God. This, then,
   he does, when he declares that this food, otherwise health-giving, will
   turn out to their destruction, and will be converted into poison to
   those that eat unworthily

   He adds the reasons because they distinguish not the Lord's body, that
   is, as a sacred thing from a profane. "They handle the sacred body of
   Christ with unwashed hands, (Mark 7:2,) [707] nay more, as if it were a
   thing of nought, they consider not how great is the value of it. [708]
   They will therefore pay the penalty of so dreadful a profanation." Let
   my readers keep in mind what I stated a little ago, that the body [709]
   is presented to them, though their unworthiness deprives them of a
   participation in it.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [667] "Qu'ils commettoyent en la Cene;" -- "Which they had fallen into
   as to the Supper."

   [668] "Que nous gastons tout, et ne laissons rien en son entier;" --
   "That we are destroying everything, and are leaving nothing entire."

   [669] Our Author seems to allude here to what he had said previously,
   when [26]commenting on 1 Corinthians 4:1, as to the duty devolving on
   stewards of the mysteries of God. -- Ed.

   [670] "Car le Seigneur pouuoit bien quelque temps deuant ordonner a ses
   Apostres l'obseruation de ce Sacrement;" -- "For the Lord might have on
   some previous occasion appointed to his Apostles the observance of this
   Sacrament."

   [671] "Vne ceremonie, qui ne peust faire que de nuit, comme les Payens
   auoyent la feste de Ceres;" -- "A ceremony which could only be observed
   at night, as the heathens held the festival of Ceres." The time when
   the festival was held, was in accordance with the peculiar secrecy with
   which its rites were observed. -- Ed.

   [672] "Pour partie, ou de la substance de son institution;" -- "As a
   part of his institution, or of the essence of it."

   [673] "Ils se mocquent;" -- "They deride."

   [674] "Sa misericorde infinie;" -- "His infinite mercy."

   [675] "Et n'en soyons enuers luy ingrats, mats soyons enflambez a vne
   vraye recognoissance;" -- "And may not be ungrateful towards him, but
   may be kindled up to a true acknowledgment."

   [676] "Et bien poiser;" -- "And ponder well."

   [677] "Mais ie vous prie, a quel propos;" -- "But for what purpose, I
   pray you."

   [678] "Comme s'il retournoit de voir vne bastelerie inutile et sotte;"
   -- "As if they were returning from seeing a useless and foolish
   mountebank scene."

   [679] "Vn banquet de la confrairie des Sacrificateurs de Mars, lesquels
   les Romains nommoyent Salii;" -- "To the banquet of the fraternity of
   the priests of Mars, whom the Romans called Salii." They received this
   name from their going through the city leaping and dancing. The feast
   which they partook of, after finishing their procession, was
   exceedingly sumptuous. Hence the expression -- "Epulari Saliarem in
   modum" -- "to feast sumptuously." Cic. Att. 5. 9. -- Ed.

   [680] "Nous reiettons l'effet, et luy fermons la porte;" -- "We reject
   its accomplishment, and shut the door against it."

   [681] "Par leur belle oblation qu'ils font tousles iours;" -- "By their
   admirable oblation, which they make every day."

   [682] "Vne apparence et representation de sacrifice;" -- "An appearance
   and representation of a sacrifice."

   [683] "Ce seroit vne impudence et opinionastrete trop grande;" -- "This
   were excessive impudence and obstinacy."

   [684] "C'est a dire, qui est ordinaire en matiere des Sacremens;" --
   "That is to say, what is usual in connection with Sacraments."

   [685] "Vn gage et tesmoignage externe;" -- "An outward token and
   evidence."

   [686] "Pour penser qu'il nous repaisse d'ombres et vaines figures;" --
   "To think that he would feed us with shadows and empty
   representations."

   [687] By the accidents of the bread are meant its color, taste, smell,
   and shape. -- Ed.

   [688] In this passage, as, also, in some other parts of his writings,
   Calvin seems to affirm the real presence of Christ in the Lord's
   Supper, in some mysterious manner, while he was, as is well known,
   opposed to consubstantiation, as well as to transubstantiation. The
   late venerable Dr. Dick of Glasgow, while treating of the Lord's Supper
   -- while he makes mention of Calvin in terms of the highest respect, as
   "one of the brightest ornaments of the Reformation," who, "in learning,
   genius, and zeal, had few equals, and no superior," -- animadverts on
   some expressions made use of in the Institutes, which seem not
   altogether in harmony with his general system of views in reference to
   the presence of Christ in the sacrament of the Supper. Dick's Lectures
   on Theology, volume 4. -- Ed.

   [689] "Vne estendue de son corps infinie;" -- "An infinite extension of
   his body."

   [690] "Vn signe et tesmoignage;" -- "A sign and evidence."

   [691] "Esleve ton esprit et ton coeur jusques la;" -- "Raise thy mind
   and heart thither."

   [692] It is worthy of notice, that our Author has made use of the same
   Greek term (when [27]commenting on 1 Corinthians 5:8) in reference to
   the Passover, which was intended partly as a memorial (mnemosunon). The
   term is of frequent occurrence in the same sense in Herodious, and
   occasionally in other Classical authors. -- Ed

   [693] "Du ciel il fait descouler sur nous la vertu de sa chair
   presentement et vrayement;" -- "He makes the virtue of his flesh pour
   down upon us from heaven presently and truly."

   [694] "Continuel et sans interualle;" -- "Continuous, and without an
   interval."

   [695] "Confermer et seeller;" -- "Confirm and seal."

   [696] "L'institution du Fils de Dieu;" -- "The institution of the Son
   of God."

   [697] "Que de nostre part le recognoissions;" -- "That we, on our part,
   may recognise it."

   [698] From, eucharistesas, (having given thanks,) which is made use of
   by Paul, and also by the Evangelists, (see Harmony, [28]vol. 3, p. 205,
   n. 1,) in their account of the original appointment of the Supper. The
   term is at the same time expressive of the spirit of the institution,
   in respect of thanksgiving. -- Ed

   [699] "Veu que par consequent il n'ha rien de l'Esprit de Christ;" --
   "Since he has, consequently, nothing of the Spirit of Christ."

   [700] "Vne foy historique qu on appelle; (c est a dire pour consentir
   simplement a l'histoire de l'Euangile;") -- "An historical faith, as
   they call it; (that is to say, to give a simple assent to the gospel
   history.")

   [701] "Car ie n'ose proposer et imaginer Christ a demi;" -- "For I dare
   not present and imagine Christ in half."

   [702] This celebrated saying of Augustine (which occurs in Hom. in
   Joann. 62) is quoted also in the Institutes, (volume 3,) where our
   author handles at great length the subject here adverted to. -- Ed.

   [703] "Voyla lear belle preparation;" -- "See their admirable
   preparation!"

   [704] "Ces miserables;" -- "Those miserable creatures."

   [705] "Et qu'ils on debagoule leur turpitude a monsieur le prestre;" --
   "And when they have blabbed out their baseness to Mr. Priest"

   [706] "La punition que Dieu en fera;" -- "The punishment that God will
   inflict upon it."

   [707] "Ils manient le corps precieux de Christ irreueremment, c'est a
   dire, sans nettoyer leur conscience;" -- "They handle the precious body
   of Christ irreverently, that is to say, without washing their
   conscience."

   [708] In the Vat and Alex MSS. and the Copt version, the reading is
   simply me diakrinon to soma -- not distinguishing the body; while later
   copies have to soma tou Kurion -- the body of the Lord The verb
   diakrino is employed by Herodotus in the sense of distinguishing, in
   the following expression: diakrinon oudena -- without any distinction
   of persons (Herod. 3. 39.) It is supposed by some that the word, as
   employed here, contains an allusion to the distinguishing of meats
   under the Mosaic law. -- Ed

   [709] "Le corps de Christ;" -- "The body of Christ."
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 11:30-34

   30. For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep.

   30. Propterea inter vos infirmi sunt multi, et aegroti, et dormiunt
   multi.

   31. For if we would judge ourselves, we should not be judged.

   31. Si enim ipsi nos iudicassemus, non iudicaremur.

   32. But when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we
   should not be condemned with the world.

   32. Porro quum iudicamur, a Domino corripimur, ne cum hoc mundo
   damnemur.

   33. Wherefore, my brethren, when ye come together to eat, tarry one for
   another.

   33. Itaque, fratres mei, dum convenitis ad edendum, alii alios ex
   spectate.

   34. And if any man hunger, let him eat at home; that ye come not
   together unto condemnation. And the rest will I set in order when I
   come.

   34. Si autem quispiam esurit, domi edat, ne in iudicium edatis; caetera
   autem, quum venero, disponam.


   30. For this cause, etc. After having treated in a general way of
   unworthy eating, and of the kind of punishment that awaits those who
   pollute this sacrament, he now instructs the Corinthians as to the
   chastisement which they were at that time enduring. It is not known
   whether a pestilence was raging there at that time, or whether they
   were laboring under other kinds of disease. However it may have been as
   to this, we infer from Paul's words, that the Lord had sent some
   scourge upon them for their correction. Nor does Paul merely
   conjecture, that it is on that account that they are punished, but he
   affirms it as a thing that was perfectly well known by him. He says,
   then, that many lay sick -- that many were kept long in a languishing
   condition, and that many had died, in consequence of that abuse of the
   Supper, because they had offended God. By this he intimates, that by
   diseases and other chastisements from God, we are admonished to think
   of our sins; for God does not afflict us without good reason, for he
   takes no pleasure in our afflictions.

   The subject is a copious and ample one; but let it suffice to advert to
   it here in a single word. If in Paul's times an ordinary abuse of the
   Supper [710] could kindle the wrath of God against the Corinthians, so
   that he punished them thus severely, what ought we to think as to the
   state of matters at the present day? We see, throughout the whole
   extent of Popery, not merely horrid profanations of the Supper, but
   even a sacrilegious abomination set up in its room. In the first place,
   it is prostituted to filthy lucre (1 Timothy 3:8) and merchandise.
   Secondly, it is maimed, by taking away the use of the cup. Thirdly, it
   is changed into another aspect, [711] by its having become customary
   for one to partake of his own feast separately, participation being
   done away. [712] Fourthly, there is there no explanation of the meaning
   of the sacrament, but a mumbling that would accord better with a
   magical incantation, or the detestable sacrifices of the Gentiles, than
   with our Lord's institution. Fifthly, there is an endless number of
   ceremonies, abounding partly with trifles, partly with superstition,
   and consequently manifest pollutions. Sixthly, there is the diabolical
   invention of sacrifice, which contains an impious blasphemy against the
   death of Christ. Seventhly, it is fitted to intoxicate miserable men
   with carnal confidence, while they present it to God as if it were an
   expiation, and think that by this charm they drive off everything
   hurtful, and that without faith and repentance. Nay more, while they
   trust that they are armed against the devil and death, and are
   fortified against God by a sure defense, they venture to sin with much
   more freedom, [713] and become more obstinate. Eighthly, an idol is
   there adored in the room of Christ. In short, it is filled with all
   kinds of abomination. [714]

   Nay even among ourselves, who have the pure administration of the
   Supper restored to us, [715] in virtue of a return, as it were, from
   captivity, [716] how much irreverence! How much hypocrisy on the part
   of many! What a disgraceful mixture, while, without any discrimination,
   wicked and openly abandoned persons intrude themselves, such as no man
   of character and decency would admit to common intercourse! [717] And
   yet after all, we wonder how it comes that there are so many wars, so
   many pestilences, so many failures of the crop, so many disasters and
   calamities -- as if the cause were not manifest! And assuredly, we must
   not expect a termination to our calamities, until we have removed the
   occasion of them, by correcting our faults.

   31. For if we would judge ourselves Here we have another remarkable
   statement -- that God does not all of a sudden become enraged against
   us, so as to inflict punishment immediately upon our sinning, but that,
   for the most part, it is owing to our carelessness, that he is in a
   manner constrained to punish us, when he sees that we are in a careless
   and drowsy state, and are flattering ourselves in our sins. [718] Hence
   we either avert, or mitigate impending punishment, if we first call
   ourselves to account, and, actuated by a spirit of repentance,
   deprecate the anger of God by inflicting punishment voluntarily upon
   ourselves. [719] In short, believers anticipate, by repentance, the
   judgment of God, and there is no other remedy, by which they may obtain
   absolution in the sight of God, but by voluntarily condemning
   themselves

   You must not, however, apprehend, as Papists are accustomed to do, that
   there is here a kind of transaction between us and God, as if, by
   inflicting punishment upon ourselves of our own accord, we rendered
   satisfaction to him, and did, in a manner, redeem ourselves from his
   hand. We do not, therefore, anticipate the judgment of God, on the
   ground of our bringing any compensation to appease him. The reason is
   this -- because God, when he chastises us, has it in view to shake us
   out of our drowsiness, and arouse us to repentance. If we do this of
   our own accord, there is no longer any reason, why he should proceed to
   inflict his judgment upon us. If, however, any one, after having begun
   to feel displeased with himself, and meditate repentance, is,
   nevertheless, still visited with God's chastisements, let us know that
   his repentance is not so valid or sure, as not to require some
   chastisement to be sent upon him, by which it may be helped forward to
   a fuller development. Mark how repentance wards off the judgment of God
   by a suitable remedy -- not, however, by way of compensation.

   32. But when we are judged Here we have a consolation that is
   exceedingly necessary; for if any one in affliction thinks that God is
   angry with him, he will rather be discouraged than excited to
   repentance. Paul, accordingly, says, that God is angry with believers
   in such a way as not in the meantime to be forgetful of his mercy: nay
   more, that it is on this account particularly that he punishes them --
   that he may consult their welfare. It is an inestimable consolation
   [720] ^-- that the punishments by which our sins are chastened are
   evidences, not of God's anger for our destruction, but rather of his
   paternal love, and are at the same time of assistance towards our
   salvation, for God is angry with us as his sons, whom he will not leave
   to perish.

   When he says -- that we may not be condemned with the world, he
   intimates two things. The first is, that the children of this world,
   while they sleep on quietly and securely in their delights, [721] are
   fattened up, like hogs, for the day of slaughter (Jeremiah 12:3.) For
   though the Lord sometimes invites the wicked, also, to repentance by
   his chastisements, yet he often passes them over as strangers, [722]
   and allows them to rush on with impunity, until they have filled up the
   measure of their final condemnation. (Genesis 15:16.) This privilege,
   therefore, belongs to believers exclusively -- that by punishments they
   are called back from destruction. The second thing is this -- that
   chastisements are necessary remedies for believers, for otherwise they,
   too, would rush on to everlasting destruction, [723] were they not
   restrained by temporal punishment.

   These considerations should lead us not merely to patience, so as to
   endure with equanimity the troubles that are assigned to us by God, but
   also to gratitude, that, giving thanks to God our Father, we may resign
   ourselves [724] to his discipline by a willing subjection. They are
   also useful to us in various ways; for they cause our afflictions to be
   salutary to us, while they train us up for mortification of the flesh,
   and a pious abasement -- they accustom us to obedience to God -- they
   convince us of our own weakness, they kindle up in our minds fervency
   in prayer -- they exercise hope, so that at length whatever there is of
   bitterness in them is all swallowed up in spiritual joy.

   33. Wherefore, my brethren From the discussion of a general doctrine,
   he returns to the particular subject with which he had set out, and
   comes to this conclusion, that equality must be observed in the Lord's
   Supper, that there may be a real participation, as there ought to be,
   and that they may not celebrate every one his own supper; and farther,
   that this sacrament ought not to be mixed up with common feasts.

   34. The rest I will set in order when I come It is probable, that there
   were some things in addition, which it would be of advantage to put
   into better order, but as they were of less importance, the Apostle
   delays the correction of them until his coming among them. It may be,
   at the same time, that there was nothing of this nature; but as one
   knows better what is necessary when he is present to see, Paul reserves
   to himself the liberty of arranging matters when present, according as
   occasion may require. Papists arm themselves against us with this
   buckler, too, for defending their mass For they interpret this to be
   the setting in order which Paul here promises -- as if he would have
   taken the liberty [725] of overturning that eternal appointment of
   Christ, which he here so distinctly approves of! For what resemblance
   does the mass bear to Christ's institution? But away with such trifles,
   as it is certain that Paul speaks only of outward decorum. As this is
   put in the power of the Church, so it ought to be arranged according to
   the condition of times, places, and persons.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [710] "Vn tel abus de la Cene qui n'estoit pas des plus grans;" --
   "Such an abuse of the Supper, as was not one of the greatest."

   [711] "Vne forme estrange et du tout autre;" -- "A strange and quite
   different form."

   [712] "Sans en distribuer ne communiquer aux autres;" -- "Without
   distributing or communicating of it to others."

   [713] "Ils pechent plus audacieusement, et a bride auallee;" -- "They
   sin more daringly, and with a loose bridle."

   [714] The above paragraph is aptly designated in the old English
   translation by Thomas Tymme, (1573) "a lyuely description of the
   Popishe Masse." -- Ed.

   [715] "Le pur vsage de la Cene en son entier, qui nous a este
   finalement rendu par la grace de Dieu;" -- "The pure use of the Supper
   in its completeness, which has been at last restored to us by the grace
   of God."

   [716] Calvin here employs the term postliminum, (restoration from
   captivity,) and most felicitously compares the restoration of the pure
   observance of religious ordinances, consequent upon the Reformation
   from Popery, to the recovery, by a Roman citizen, of his superior
   privileges, on his return from a state of captivity, during which they
   had been -- not forfeited -- but merely suspended. -- Ed.

   [717] "Lesquels vn homme de bien, et qui auroit honnestete en quelque
   recommendation, ne receuroit iamais a sa table;" -- "Whom a man of
   principle -- that had any regard to decency -- would never admit to his
   table."

   [718] "Quand il voit que nous ne nous soucions de rien, et que
   nous-nous endormons en nos pechez, et nous fiattons en nos ordures et
   vilenies;" -- "When he sees that we are quite careless, and are asleep
   in our sins, and are flattering ourselves in our filthinesses and
   pollutions."

   [719] "Prions nostre bon Dieu d'addoucir la rigueur de sa iustice; par
   manier de dire nous punissans nous-mesmes sans attendre qu'il y mette
   la main;" -- "We beseech our good God to mitigate the rigour of his
   justice -- punishing ourselves (so to speak) instead of waiting till he
   put forth his hand to do it."

   [720] "Y a-il plus grande consolation pour le Chrestien que ceste-ci?"
   -- "Is there a greater consolation for the Christian than this?"

   [721] "Sont tout asseurez, et ne se soucians du iugement de Dieu
   s'endorment en leurs plaisirs et voluptez;" -- "Are quite confident,
   and not concerning themselves as to the judgment of God, sleep on in
   their pleasures and delights."

   [722] "I1 aduient souuent qu'il les met en oubli comme estrangers;" --
   "It often happens that he overlooks them as strangers."

   [723] "Ils tomberoyent aussi bien que les autres en ruine eternelle;"
   -- "They would fall, as well as others, into everlasting destruction."

   [724] "Voluntairement, A soustenir tel chastisement qu'il luy plaira
   nous enuoyer;" -- "Willingly to bear such chastisement as he may be
   pleased to send upon us."

   [725] "Mais c'est bien a propos, comme si ce sainct personnage se fust
   donne ceste license;" -- "But this is a likely thing truly! As if that
   holy personage would have allowed himself this liberty,!"
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 12
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 12:1-7

   1. Now concerning spiritual gifts, brethren, I would not have you
   ignorant.

   1. Porro de spiritualibus, fratres, nolo vos ignorare.

   2. Ye know that ye were Gentiles, carried away unto these dumb idols,
   even as ye were led.

   2. Scitis, quum Gentes eratis, qualiter simulacra muta, prout
   ducebamini, sequuti sitis.

   3. Wherefore I give you to understand, that no man speaking by the
   Spirit of God calleth Jesus accursed; and that no man can say that
   Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost.

   3. Quamobrem notum vobis facio, quod nemo in Spiritu Dei loquens, dicit
   anathema Iesum: et nemo potest dicere Dominum Iesum, nisi per Spiritum
   sanctum.

   4. Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit.

   4. Divisiones autem donorum sunt, sed unus Spiritus.

   5. And there are differences of administrations, but the same Lord.

   5. Et divisiones ministeriorum aunt, sed unus Dominus.

   6. And there are diversities of operations, but it is the same God
   which worketh all in all.

   6. Et divisiones facultatum sunt, sed Deus unus, qui operatur omnia in
   omnibus.

   7. But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit
   withal.

   7. Unicuique autem datur manifestatio Spiritus ad utilitatem.


   1. Now concerning spiritual things. He goes on to correct another
   fault. As the Corinthians abused the gifts of God for ostentation and
   show, and love was little, if at all, regarded, he shows them for what
   purpose believers are adorned by God with spiritual gifts -- for the
   edification of their brethren. This proposition, however, he divides
   into two parts; for, in the first place, he teaches, that God is the
   author of those gifts, and, secondly, having established this, he
   reasons as to their design. He proves from their own experience, that
   those things in which they gloried, are bestowed upon men through the
   exercise of God's favor; for he reminds them how ignorant they were,
   and stupid, and destitute of all spiritual light, previously to God's
   calling them. Hence it appears, that they had been furnished with them
   -- not by nature, but through God's unmerited benignity.

   As to the words; when he says -- I would not that ye should be
   ignorant, we must supply the expression -- as to what is right, or as
   to what is your duty, or some similar expression; and by spiritual
   things he means spiritual gifts, as to which we shall have occasion to
   see afterwards. In what follows there is a twofold reading; for some
   manuscripts have simply hoti others add hote. The former means because
   -- assigning a reason: the latter means when; and this latter reading
   suits much better. But besides this diversity, the construction is in
   other respects confused; but still, the meaning is evident. Literally,
   it is this -- Ye know, that when ye were Gentiles, after dumb idols,
   according as ye were led, following I have, however, faithfully given
   Paul's meaning. By dumb idols he means -- having neither feeling nor
   motion.

   Let us learn from this passage how great is the blindness of the human
   mind: when it is without the illumination of the Holy Spirit, inasmuch
   as it stands in amazement at dumb idols, [726] and cannot rise higher
   in searching after God; nay more, it is led by Satan as if it were a
   brute. [727] He makes use of the term Gentiles here, in the same sense
   as in Ephesians 2:12.

   Ye were at one time Gentiles, says he, without God,
   strangers to the hope of salvation, etc.

   Perhaps, too, he reasons by way of contrast. What if [728] they should
   now show themselves to be less submissive to God, after his having
   taken them under his care, to be governed by his word and Spirit, than
   they formerly discovered themselves to be forward and compliant, in
   following the suggestions of Satan!

   3. Wherefore I give you to know. Having admonished them from their own
   experience, he sets before them a general doctrine, which he deduces
   from it; for what the Corinthians had experienced in themselves is
   common to all mankind -- to wander on in error, [729] previously to
   their being brought back, through the kindness of God, into the way of
   truth. Hence it is necessary that we should be directed by the Spirit
   of God, or we shall wander on for ever. From this, too, it follows,
   that all things that pertain to the true knowledge of God, are the
   gifts of the Holy Spirit,. He at the same time derives an argument from
   opposite causes to opposite effects. No one, speaking by the Spirit of
   God, can revile Christ; so, on the other hand, no one can speak well of
   Christ, but by the Spirit of Christ. To say that Jesus is accursed is
   utter blasphemy against him. To say that Jesus is the Lord, is to speak
   of him in honorable terms and with reverence, and to extol his majesty.

   Here it is asked -- "As the wicked sometimes speak of Christ in
   honorable and magnificent terms, is this an indication that they have
   the Spirit of God?" I answer -- "They undoubtedly have, so far as that
   effect is concerned; but the gift of regeneration is one thing, and the
   gift of bare intelligence, with which Judas himself was endowed, when
   he preached the gospel, is quite another." Hence, too, we perceive how
   great our weakness is, as we cannot so much as move our tongue for the
   celebration of God's praise, unless it be governed by his Spirit. Of
   this the Scripture, also, frequently reminds us, and the saints
   everywhere acknowledge that unless the Lord open their mouths, they are
   not fit to be the heralds of his praise. Among others, Isaiah says -- I
   am a man of unclean lips, etc. (Isaiah 6:5.)

   4. Now there are diversities of gifts The symmetry of the Church [730]
   consists, so to speak, of a manifold unity, [731] that is, when the
   variety of gifts is directed to the same object, as in music there are
   different sounds, but suited to each other with such an adaptation, as
   to produce concord. Hence it is befitting that there should be a
   distinction of gifts as well as of offices, and yet all harmonize in
   one. Paul, accordingly, in the 12th chapter of Romans, commends this
   variety, that no one may, by rashly intruding himself into another's
   place, confound the distinction which the Lord has established. Hence
   he orders every one to be contented with his own gifts, and cultivate
   the particular department that has been assigned to him. [732] He
   prohibits them from going beyond their own limits by a foolish
   ambition. In fine, he exhorts that every one should consider how much
   has been given him, what measure has been allotted to him, and to what
   he has been called. Here, on the other hand, he orders every one to
   bring what he has to the common heap, and not keep back the gifts of
   God in the way of enjoying every one his own, apart from the others,
   [733] but aim unitedly at the edification of all in common. In both
   passages, he brings forward the similitude of the human body, but, as
   may be observed, on different accounts. The sum of what he states
   amounts to this -- that gifts are not distributed thus variously among
   believers, in order that they may be used apart, but that in the
   division there is a unity, inasmuch as one Spirit is the source of all
   those gifts, one God is the Lord of all administrations, and the author
   of all exercises of power. Now God, who is the beginning, ought also to
   be the end.

   One Spirit This passage ought to be carefully observed in opposition to
   fanatics, [734] who think that the name Spirit means nothing essential,
   but merely the gifts or actions of divine power. Here, however, Paul
   plainly testifies, that there is one essential power of God, whence all
   his works proceed. The term Spirit, it is true, is sometimes
   transferred by metonymy to the gifts themselves. Hence we read of the
   Spirit of knowledge -- of judgment -- of fortitude -- of modesty. [735]
   Paul, however, here plainly testifies that judgment, and knowledge, and
   gentleness, and all other gifts, proceed from one source. For it is the
   office of the Holy Spirit to put forth and exercise the power of God by
   conferring these gifts upon men, and distributing them among them.

   One Lord. The ancients made use of this testimony in opposition to the
   Arians, for the purpose of maintaining a Trinity of persons. For there
   is mention made here of the Spirit, secondly of the Lord, and lastly of
   God, and to these Three, one and the same operation is ascribed. Thus,
   by the name Lord, they understood Christ. But for my part, though I
   have no objection to its being understood in this way, I perceive, at
   the same time, that it is a weak argument for stopping the mouths of
   Arians; for there is a correspondence between the word administrations
   and the word Lord. The administrations, says Paul, are different, but
   there is only one God whom we must serve, whatever administration we
   discharge. This antithesis, then, shows what is the simple meaning, so
   that to confine it to Christ is rather forced.

   6. One God that worketh. Where we use the word powers the Greek term is
   energemata, a term which contains an allusion to the verb worketh, as
   in Latin effectus (an effect) corresponds with the verb effectus (to
   effect.) Paul's meaning is, that although believers may be endowed with
   different powers, they all take their rise from one and the same power
   on the part of God. Hence the expression employed here -- worketh all
   things in all -- does not refer to the general providence of God, but
   to the liberality that he exercises towards us, in bestowing upon every
   one some gift. The sum is this -- that there is nothing in mankind that
   is good or praiseworthy but what comes from God alone. Hence it is out
   of place here to agitate the question -- in what manner God acts in
   Satan and in reprobates.

   7. But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man He now
   points out the purpose for which God has appointed his gifts, for he
   does not confer them upon us in vain, nor does he intend that they
   shall serve the purpose of ostentation. Hence we must inquire as to the
   purpose for which they are conferred. As to this Paul answers -- (with
   a view to utility) -- pros to sumpheron; that is, that the Church may
   receive advantage thereby. The manifestation of the Spirit may be taken
   in a passive as well as in an active sense -- in a passive sense,
   because wherever there is prophecy, or knowledge, or any other gift,
   the Spirit of God does there manifest himself -- in an active sense,
   because the Spirit of God, when he enriches us with any gift, unlocks
   his treasures, for the purpose of manifesting to us those things that
   would otherwise have been concealed and shut up. The second
   interpretation suits better. The view taken by Chrysostom is rather
   harsh and forced -- that this term is used, [736] because unbelievers
   do not recognize God, except by visible miracles.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [726] "I1 demeure la abbruti apres les idoles;" -- "It remains there,
   in a brutish attachment to idols."

   [727] This idea is brought out more fully by Bloomfield, who observes
   that apagesthai (to be carried away) is "a strong, term, denoting being
   hurried away by a force which cannot be resisted; and here refers to
   the blind infatuation by which the heathens were led away into idolatry
   and vice, like brute beasts that have no understanding. This," he adds,
   "is especially alluded to in hos an egesthe -- as ye might be led, viz.
   by custom, example, or inclination, just as it might happen." -- Ed

   [728] "Que ce sera une vilenie a eux s'ils," etc.; -- "It will be a
   disgrace to them if they," etc.

   [729] "D'estre errans et abusez en diuerses sortes;" -- "To be
   wandering and deluded in various ways."

   [730] "La proportion et ordre bien compasse qui est en l'Eglise;" --
   "The proportion and well regulated order that is in the Church."

   [731] "Consiste en vne vnite faite de plusieurs parties assemblees;" --
   "Consists of a unity made up of many parts put together."

   [732] "I1 vent donc qu'un chacun se contentant du don qu'il a receu,
   s'employe a le faire valoir, et s'acquitter de son deuoir;" -- "He
   would, therefore, have every one, contenting himself with the gift that
   he has received, to employ himself in improving it, and carefully
   discharge his duty."

   [733] "Pour en iouyr a part, sans en communiquer a ses freres;" -- "So
   as to enjoy them apart, without imparting of them to his brethren."

   [734] "Vn tas d'esprits enragez;" -- "A troop of furious spirits."

   [735] "De discretion;" -- "Of discretion."

   [736] "Que ceci est appele Manifestation:" -- "That this is termed a
   Manifestation."
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 12:8-13

   8. For to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom; to another the
   word of knowledge by the same Spirit;

   8. Huic quidem per Spiritum datur sermo sapientiae, alteri datur sermo
   cognitionis, secundum eundem Spiritum.

   9. To another faith by the same Spirit; to another the gifts of healing
   by the same Spirit;

   9. Alii fides in eodem Spiritu, alii dona sanationum in codera Spritu.

   10. To another the working of miracles; to another prophecy; to another
   discerning of spirits; to another divers kinds of tongues; to another
   the interpretation of tongues:

   10. Alii facultates potentiarum, alii autem prophetia, alii autem
   discretiones spirituum, alii genera linguarum, alii interpretatio
   linguarum.

   11. But all these worketh that one and the selfsame Spirit, dividing to
   every man severally as he will.

   11. Porroomnia haec efficit unus et idem Spiritus, distribuens seorsum
   cuique prout vult.

   12. For as the body is one, and hath many members, and all the members
   of that one body, being many, are one body: so also is Christ.

   12. Quemadmodum enim corpus unum est, et membra habet multa: onmia
   autem membra corporis unius quum multa sint, corpus autem est unum: ita
   et Christus.

   13. For by one Spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether we be
   Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free; and have been all made to
   drink into one Spirit.

   13. Etenim per unum Spiritum nos omnes in unum corpus baptizati sumus,
   sive Iudaei, sive Graeci: sive servi, sive liberi: et omnes in uno
   Spiritu potum hausimus.


   8. To one is given He now subjoins an enumeration, or, in other words,
   specifies particular kinds -- not indeed all of them, but such as are
   sufficient for his present purpose. "Believers," says he, "are endowed
   with different gifts, but let every one acknowledge, that he is
   indebted for whatever he has to the Spirit of God, for he pours forth
   his gifts as the sun scatters his rays in every direction. As to the
   difference between these gifts, knowledge (or understanding) and wisdom
   are taken in different senses in the Scriptures, but here I take them
   in the way of less and greater, as in Colossians 2:3, where they are
   also joined together, when Paul says, that in Christ are hid all the
   treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Knowledge, therefore, in my opinion,
   means acquaintance with sacred things -- Wisdom, on the other hand,
   means the perfection of it. Sometimes prudence is put, as it were, in
   the middle place between these two, and in that case it denotes skill
   [737] in applying knowledge to some useful purpose. They are, it is
   true, very nearly allied; but still you observe a difference when they
   are put together. Let us then take knowledge as meaning ordinary
   information, and wisdom, as including revelations that are of a more
   secret and sublime order. [738]

   The term faith is employed here to mean a special faith, as we shall
   afterwards see from the context. A special faith is of such a kind as
   does not apprehend Christ wholly, for redemption, righteousness, and
   sanctification, but only in so far as miracles are performed in his
   name. Judas had a faith of this kind, and he wrought miracles too by
   means of it. Chrysostom distinguishes it in a somewhat different
   manner, calling it the faith of miracles, not of doctrines. [739] This,
   however, does not differ much from the interpretation previously
   mentioned. By the gift of healings [740] every one knows what is meant.

   As to the workings of powers, or, as some render it, the operations of
   influences, there is more occasion for doubt. I am inclined, however,
   to think, that what is meant is the influence which is exercised
   against devils, and also against hypocrites. When, therefore, Christ
   and his Apostles by authority restrained devils, or put them to flight,
   that was energema, (powerful working,) and, in like manner, when Paul
   smote the sorcerer with blindness, (Acts 13:11,) and when Peter struck
   Ananias and Sapphira dead upon the spot with a single word. The gifts
   of healing and of miracles, therefore, serve to manifest the goodness
   of God, but this last, his severity for the destruction of Satan. [741]

   By prophecy, I understand the singular and choice endowment of
   unfolding the secret will of God, so that a Prophet is a messenger, as
   it were, between God and man. [742] My reason for taking this view will
   be explained more fully afterwards.

   The discerning of spirits, was a clearness of perception in forming a
   judgment as to those who professed to be something. (Acts 5:36.) I
   speak not of that natural wisdom, by which we are regulated in judging.
   It was a special illumination, with which some were endowed by the gift
   of God. The use of it was this: that they might not be imposed upon by
   masks, of mere pretences, [743] but might by that spiritual judgment
   distinguish, as by a particular mark, the true ministers of Christ from
   the false.

   There was a difference between the knowledge of tongues, and the
   interpretation of them, for those who were endowed with the former
   were, in many cases, not acquainted with the language of the nation
   with which they had to deal. The interpreters [744] rendered foreign
   tongues into the native language. These endowments they did not at that
   time acquire by labor or study, but were put in possession of them by a
   wonderful revelation of the Spirit. [745]

   11. One and the same spirit distributing. Hence it follows that those
   act amiss who, having no concern as to participation, break asunder
   that holy harmony, that is fitly adjusted in all its parts, only when
   under the guidance of the same Spirit, all conspire toward one and the
   same object. He again calls the Corinthians to unity, by reminding them
   that all have derived from one fountain whatever they possess, while he
   instructs them, at the same time, that no one has so much as to have
   enough within himself, so as not to require help from others. For this
   is what he means by these words -- distributing to every one severally
   as he willeth The Spirit of God, therefore, distributes them among us,
   in order that we may make all contribute to the common advantage. To no
   one does he give all, lest any one, satisfied with his particular
   portion, should separate himself from others, and live solely for
   himself. The same idea is intended in the adverb severally, as it is of
   great importance to understand accurately that diversity by which God
   unites us mutually to one another. [746] Now, when will is ascribed to
   the Spirit, and that, too, in connection with power, we may conclude
   from this, that the Spirit is truly and properly God.

   12. For as the body is one He now derives a similitude from the human
   body, which he makes use of also in Romans 12:4; but it is for a
   different purpose, as I have already stated above. In that passage, he
   exhorts every one to be satisfied with his own calling, and not to
   invade another's territory; as ambition, curiosity, or some other
   disposition, induces many to take in hand more than is expedient. Here,
   however, he exhorts believers to cleave to each other in a mutual
   distribution of gifts, as they were not conferred upon them by God that
   every one should enjoy his own separately, but that one should help
   another. It is usual, however, for any society of men, or congregation,
   to be called a body, as one city constitutes a body, and so, in like
   manner, one senate, and one people. Monenius Agrippa, [747] too, in
   ancient times, when desirous to conciliate the Roman people, when at
   variance with the senate, made use of an apologue, not very unlike the
   doctrine of Paul here. [748] Among Christians, however, the case is
   very different; for they do not constitute a mere political body, but
   are the spiritual and mystical body of Christ, as Paul himself
   afterwards adds. (1 Corinthians 12:27.) The meaning therefore is --
   "Though the members of the body are various, and have different
   functions, they are, nevertheless, linked together in such a manner
   that they coalesce in one. [749] We, accordingly, who are members of
   Christ, although we are endowed with various gifts, ought,
   notwithstanding, to have an eye to that connection which we have in
   Christ."

   So also is Christ The name of Christ is used here instead of the
   Church, because the similitude was intended to apply not to God's
   only-begotten Son, but to us. It is a passage that is full of choice
   consolation, inasmuch as he calls the Church Christ; for Christ [750]
   confers upon us this honor -- that he is willing to be esteemed and
   recognised, not in himself merely, but also in his members. Hence the
   same Apostle says elsewhere, (Ephesians 1:23,) that the Church is his
   completion, [751] as though he would, if separated from his members, be
   incomplete. And certainly, as Augustine elegantly expresses himself in
   one part of his writings --

   "Since we are in Christ a fruit-bearing vine, what are we out of him
   but dry twigs?" (John 15:4.)

   In this, then, our consolation lies -- that, as he and the Father are
   one, so we are one with him. Hence it is that his name is applied to
   us.

   13. For we are all baptized by one Spirit. Here there is a proof
   brought forward from the effect of baptism. "We are," says he,
   "engrafted by baptism into Christ's body, so that we are by a mutual
   link bound together as members, and live one and the same life. Hence
   every one, that would remain in the Church of Christ, must necessarily
   cultivate this fellowship." He speaks, however, of the baptism of
   believers, which is efficacious through the grace of the Spirit, for,
   in the case of many, baptism is merely in the letter -- the symbol
   without the reality; but believers, along with the sacrament, receive
   the reality. Hence, with respect to God, this invariably holds good --
   that baptism is an engrafting into the body of Christ, for God in that
   ordinance does not represent anything but what he is prepared to
   accomplish, provided we are on our part capable of it. The Apostle,
   also, observes here a most admirable medium, in teaching that the
   nature of baptism is -- to connect us with Christ's body. Lest any one,
   however, should imagine, that this is effected by the outward symbol,
   he adds that it is the work of the Holy Spirit.

   Whether Jews or Greeks. He specifies these instances, to intimate, that
   no diversity of condition obstructs that holy unity which he
   recommends. This clause, too, is added suitably and appropriately, for
   envy might at that time arise from two sources -- because the Jews were
   not willing that the Gentiles should be put upon a level with them;
   and, where one had some excellence above others, with the view of
   maintaining his superiority, lie withdrew himself to a distance from
   his brethren.

   We have all drunk in one Spirit. It is literally, "We have drunk into
   one Spirit," but it would seem that, in order that the two words en
   (in) and hen (one) might not immediately follow each other, Paul
   intentionally changed en (in) into eis (into,) as he is accustomed
   frequently to do. Hence his meaning seems rather to be, that we are
   made to drink through the influence, as he had said before, of the
   Spirit of Christ, than that we have drunk into the same Spirit. It is
   uncertain, however, whether he speaks here of Baptism or of the Supper.
   I am rather inclined, however, to understand him as referring to the
   Supper, as he makes mention of drinking, for I have no doubt that he
   intended to make an allusion to the similitude of the sign. There is,
   however, no correspondence between drinking and baptism. Now, though
   the cup forms but the half of the Supper, there is no difficulty
   arising from that, for it is a common thing in Scripture to speak of
   the sacraments by synecdoche. [752] Thus he mentioned above in the
   tenth chapter (1 Corinthians 10:17) simply the bread, making no mention
   of the cup. The meaning, therefore, will be this -- that participation
   in the cup has an eye to this -- that we drink, all of us, of the same
   cup. For in that ordinance we drink of the life-giving blood of Christ,
   that we may have life in common with him -- which we truly have, when
   he lives in us by his Spirit. He teaches, therefore, that believers, so
   soon as they are initiated by the baptism of Christ, are already imbued
   with a desire of cultivating mutual unity, [753] and then afterwards,
   when they receive the sacred Supper, they are again conducted by
   degrees to the same unity, as they are all refreshed at the same time
   with the same drink.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [737] "Le sqauoir et la dexterite;" -- "Skill and dexterity." As to
   this use of the term prudentia, (prudence,) see Cicero de Officiis, 1.
   43. -- Ed.

   [738] One of the most satisfactory views of this subject is that of Dr.
   Henderson in his Lecture on "Divine Inspiration," (pp. 193,196,) who
   understands by sophia, (wisdom,) in this passage, "the sublime truths
   of the gospel, directly revealed to the Apostles, of which the logos
   (word) was the supernatural ability rightly to communicate them to
   others;" and by logos gnoseos (word of knowledge,) the faculty of
   "infallibly explaining truths and doctrines which had been previously
   divulged." -- Ed

   [739] Chrysostom's words are: Pistin ou pauten legei ten ton dogmaton
   alla ten ton semeion. "By this faith he means not that of doctrines,
   but that of miraeles." -- It was called by the schoolmen fides
   miractelorum (faith of miracles.) -- Ed

   [740] The plural is made use of, it is manifest, to intimate the number
   and variety of the diseases that were healed -- the Apostles having
   been invested with power to heal all manner of sickness, and all manner
   of disease. (Matthew 10:1.) -- Ed.

   [741] There does not appear to be sufficient ground for understanding
   the miracles here referred to as necessarily deeds of terror, while the
   connection in which the expression occurs seems to intimate, that the
   miracles here meant were more than ordinarily stupendous manifestations
   of Divine power, such as would powerfully constrain the beholder to
   exclaim, This is the finger of God! Thus, "the resuscitation of the
   dead, the innocuous handlng of serpents, or drinking of empoisoned
   liquor, the dispossession of demons, and the infliction of blindness,"
   as in the case of Elymas, the sorcerer, and of death itself, as in the
   case of Ananias and Sapphira,. were mighty deeds -- to which "no mere
   created power could possibly pretend, under any circumstances, or by
   the application of any means whatever." See Henderson on Inspiration,
   pp. 203-206. -- Ed.

   [742] "Apportant la volonte de Dieu aux hommes;" -- "Communicating the
   will of God to men."

   [743] "Par la montre et belle apparence que les gens ont aucuneffois;"
   -- "By the show and fair appearance which persons sometimes have."

   [744] "Et en tel cas ceux que auoyent le don d'interpretation des
   langues;" -- "And in such a case, those who had the gift of
   interpreting languages."

   [745] The following classification of the, gifts, (charismata) here
   enumerated by the Apostle, is suggested by Dr. Henderson, as tending to
   show the "beautiful symmetry" of the passage: -- I. O men -- logos
   sophias  --  (I. To one, the word of wisdom)
   2. allo de logos gnoses  --  (2. to another, the word of knowledge.)
   II. ETERO de pistis --  (II. To another, faith,)
   1. allo de charismata iamaton --  (1. to another, gifts of healing,)
   2. allo de energemata dumameon  --  (2. to another, working of
   miracles,)
   3. allo de propheteia  --  (3. to another, prophecy,)
   4. allo de diachriseis pneumaton  --  (4. to another, discerning of
   spirits.)
   III. ETERO de gene glosson --  (III. To another, divers kinds of
   tongues,)
   2. allo de hermeneia glosson  --  (2. to another, interpretation of
   tongues.) Thus the first class includes "the word of wisdom," and "the
   word of knowledge. Under the head of faith, that is, the faith of
   miracles, four kinds of gifts are enumerated -- "gifts of healing," --
   "working of miracles," -- "prophecy," and "discerning of spirits;"
   while the third class includes "divers kinds of tongues," and "the
   interpretation of tongues." See Henderson on Inspiration. -- Ed.

   [746] "Par laquelle Dieu nou conioint et oblige mutuellement les uns
   aux autres;" -- "By which God connects and binds us mutually to one
   another."

   [747] Menenius Agrippa, a Roman consul, on occasion of a rebellion
   breaking out among the common people against the nobles and senators,
   whom they represented as useless and cumbersome to the state, was
   successful in quelling the insurrection, by a happy use of the apologue
   referred to, founded on the intimate connection and mutual dependence
   of the different parts of the body. The reader will find this
   interesting incident related by Livy, Book 2. chapter 32. -- Ed.

   [748] "En remonstrant que les membres du corps ayans conspire contre le
   ventre, et se voulans separer d'auec luy s'en trouuerent mal les
   premiers;" -- "By showing that the members of the body, having
   conspired against the belly, and wishing to separate from it, were the
   first to experience the bad effects of this."

   [749] "Ils prenent nourriture et accroissement l'un auec l'autre;" --
   "They take nourishment and increase, one with another."

   [750] "Ce bon Seigneur Iesus;" -- "This good Lord Jesus."

   [751] Calvin, along with some other interpreters, understands the term,
   pleroma, (fullness,) in the passage referred to, in an active sense.
   Theophylact observes that the Church is the Pleroma -- completion of
   Christ, as the body and limbs are of the head. The term may, however,
   be taken in a passive sense, as meaning a thing to be filled or
   completed. -- Ed

   [752] A figure of speech, by which a part is put for the whole. See
   Quinctilian. (lnst. 8. 6, 19.)

   [753] "Si tost qu'ils sont amenez a Christ par le baptesme, desia leur
   est donne un goust de l'affection qu'ils doyuent auoir d'entretenir
   entr'eux unite et conionction naturelie;" -- "So soon as they are
   brought to Christ by baptism, there is already given to them some taste
   of the disposition which they ought to have, to maintain among
   themselves a natural unity and connection."
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 12:14-27

   14. For the body is not one member, but many.

   14. Etenim corpus non est unum membrum, sed multa.

   15. If the foot shall say, Because I am not the hand, I am not of the
   body; is it therefore not of the body?

   15. Si dixerit pes: Quoniam non sum manus, non sum ex corpore: an
   propterea non est ex corpore?

   16. And if the ear shall say, Because I am not the eye, I am not of the
   body; is it therefore not of the body?

   16. Et si dixerit auris: Quia non sum oculus, non sum ex corpore: an
   propterea non est ex corpore?

   17. If the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing? If the whole
   were hearing, where were the smelling?

   17. Si toturn corpus oculus, ubi auditus? si totum auditus, ubi
   olfactus?

   18. But now hath God set the members every one of them in the body, as
   it hath pleased him.

   18. Nunc vero Deus posuit merebra, unumquodque ipsorum in corpore prout
   voluit.

   19. And if they were all one member, where were the body?

   19. Quodsi essent omnia unum membrum, ubi corpus?

   20. But now are they many members, yet but one body.

   20. At nunc multa quidem membra, unum autem corpus.

   21. And the eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee: nor
   again the head to the feet, I have no need of you.

   21. Nec potest oculus dicere manui: Ego to opus non habeo. Nec rursum
   caput pedibus: Vobis opus non habeo.

   22. Nay, much more those members of the body, which seem to be more
   feeble, are necessary:

   22. Quin potius, quae infirmiora corporis membra videntur esse,
   necessaria sunt:

   23. And those members of the body, which we think to be less
   honourable, upon these we bestow more abundant honour; and our uncomely
   parts have more abundant comeliness.

   23. Et quae iudicamus viliora esse in corpore, his abundantiorem
   honorem circumdamus: et quae minus honesta sunt in nobis, plus decoris
   habent.

   24. For our comely parts have no need: but God hath tempered the body
   together, having given more abundant honour to that part which lacked:

   24. Quae autem decora sunt in nobis, non habent opus, sed Deus
   contemperavit corpus, tribuens henorem abundantiorem opus habenti,

   25. That there should be no schism in the body; but that the members
   should have the same care one for another.

   25. Ut ne dissidium esset in corpore, sed ut membra alia pro aliis
   invicem eandem sollicitudinem ha beant.

   26. And whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; or
   one member be honoured, all the members rejoice with it.

   26. Et sive patitur unum membrum, compatiuntur omnia membra: sive
   glorificatur unum membrum, congaudent omnia membra.

   27. Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular.

   27. Vos autem estis corpus Christi, et membra ex parte.


   15. This is a bringing out still farther (epexergasia) of the preceding
   statement, or in other words, an exposition of it, with some
   amplification, with the view of placing in a clearer light, what he had
   previously stated in a few words. Now all this accords with the
   apologue of Menenius Agrippa. "Should a dissension break out in the
   body, so that the feet would refuse to discharge their office to the
   rest of the body, and the belly in like manner, and the eyes, and the
   hands, what would be the effect? Would not the result be -- the
   destruction of the whole body?" At the same time Paul here insists more
   particularly on this one point -- that each member ought to rest
   satisfied with its own place and station, and not envy the others, for
   he institutes a comparison between the more distinguished members, and
   those that have less dignity. For the eye has a more honorable place in
   the body than the hand, and the hand than the foot But if our hands
   were, from a feeling of envy, to refuse to discharge their office,
   would nature endure this? Would the hand be listened to, when wishing
   to be separated from the body?

   To be not of the body, means here -- to have no communication with the
   other members, but to live for itself, and to seek only its own
   advantage. "Would it then," says Paul, "be allowable for the hand to
   refuse to do its office to the other members, on the ground of its
   bearing envy to the eyes?" These things are said of the natural body,
   but they must be applied to the members of the Church, lest ambition or
   misdirected emulation and envy should be the occasion of bad feeling
   among us, [754] so as to lead one that occupies an inferior station to
   grudge to afford his services to those above him.

   17. If the whole body were an eye He sets aside a foolish aiming at
   equality, by showing the impossibility of it. "If all the members,"
   says he, "desire the honor that belongs to the eye, the consequence
   will be, that the whole body will perish; for it is impossible that the
   body should remain safe and sound, if the members have not different
   functions, and a mutual correspondence between them. Hence equality
   interferes with the welfare of the body, because it produces a
   confusion that entails present ruin. What madness, then, would it be,
   should one member, instead of giving way to another, [755] conspire for
   its own ruin and that of the body!"

   18. But now God hath placed. Here we have another argument, taken from
   the appointment of God. "It has pleased God, that the body should
   consist of various members, and that the members should be endowed with
   various offices and gifts. That member, therefore, which will not rest
   satisfied with its own station, will wage war with God after the manner
   of the giants. [756] Let us, therefore, be subject to the arrangement
   which God has appointed, that we may not, to no purpose, resist his
   will." [757]

   19. If all were one member He means, that God has not acted at random,
   or without good reason, in assigning different gifts to the members of
   the body; but because it was necessary that it should be so, for the
   preservation of the body; for if this symmetry were taken away, there
   would be utter confusion and derangement. Hence we ought to submit
   ourselves the more carefully to the providence of God, which has so
   suitably arranged everything for our common advantage. One member is
   taken here to mean a mass, that is all of one shape, and not
   distinguished by any variety; for if God were to fashion our body into
   a mass of this kind, it would be a useless heap. [758]

   20. Many members -- one body He repeats this the oftener, because the
   stress of the whole question lies here -- that the unity of the body is
   of such a nature as cannot be maintained but by a diversity of members;
   and that, while the members differ from each other in offices and
   functions, it is in such a way as to have a mutual connection with each
   other for the preservation of the one body. Hence no body can retain
   its standing without a diversified symmetry of the members, that we may
   know to consult public as well as private advantage, by discharging,
   every one, the duty of his own station.

   21. And the eye cannot say to the hand Hitherto he has been showing,
   what is the office of the less honorable members -- to discharge their
   duty to the body, and not envy the more distinguished members. Now, on
   the other hand, he enjoins it upon the more honorable members, not to
   despise the inferior members, which they cannot dispense with. The eye
   excels the hand, and yet cannot despise it, or insult over it, as
   though it were useless; and he draws an argument from utility, to show
   that it ought to be thus -- "Those members, that are less esteemed, are
   the more necessary: hence, with a view to the safety of the body, they
   must not be despised." He makes use of the term weaker here, to mean
   despised, as in another passage, when he says that he glories in his
   infirmities, (2 Corinthians 12:9,) he expresses, under this term, those
   things which rendered him contemptible and abject.

   23. Which are less honorable. Here we have a second argument -- that
   the dishonor of one member turns out to the common disgrace of the
   whole body, as appears from the care that we take to cover the parts
   that are less honorable. "Those parts that are comely," says he, "do
   not require adventitious ornament; but the parts that involve shame, or
   are less comely, are cared for by us with greater concern. Why so? but
   because their shame would be the common disgrace of the whole body." To
   invest with honor is to put on a covering for the sake of ornament, in
   order that those members may be honorably concealed, which would
   involve shame if uncovered. [759]

   24. But God hath tempered the body together He again repeats, what he
   had stated once before, (1 Corinthians 12:18,) but more explicitly, --
   that God has appointed this symmetry, and that with a view to the
   advantage of the whole body, because it cannot otherwise maintain its
   standing. "For whence comes it, that all the members are of their own
   accord concerned for the honor of a less comely member, and agree
   together to conceal its shame? This inclination has been implanted in
   them by God, because without this adjustment a schism in the body would
   quickly break out. Hence it appears that the body is not merely
   shattered, and the order of nature perverted, but the authority of God
   is openly set at naught, whenever any one assumes more than belongs to
   him." [760]

   26. Whether one member suffers "Such a measure of fellow-feeling."
   (sumpatheia,) [761] says he, "is to be seen in the human body, that, if
   any inconvenience is felt by any member, all the others grieve along
   with it, and, on the other hand, rejoice along with it, in its
   prosperity. Hence there is no room there for envy or contempt." To be
   honored, here, is taken in a large sense, as meaning, to be in
   prosperity and happiness. Nothing, however, is better fitted to promote
   harmony than this community of interest, when every one feels that, by
   the prosperity of others, he is proportionally enriched, and, by their
   penury, impoverished.

   27. But ye are the body of Christ Hence what has been said respecting
   the nature and condition of the human body must be applied to us; for
   we are not a mere civil society, but, being ingrafted into Christ's
   body, are truly members one of another. Whatever, therefore, any one of
   us has, let him know that it has been given him for the edification of
   his brethren in common; and let him, accordingly, bring it forward, and
   not keep it back -- buried, as it were, within himself, or make use of
   it as his own. Let not the man, who is endowed with superior gifts, be
   puffed up with pride, and despise others; but let him consider that
   there is nothing so diminutive as to be of no use -- as, in truth, even
   the least among the pious brings forth fruit, according to his slender
   capacity, so that there is no useless member in the Church. Let not
   those who are not endowed with so much honor, envy those above them, or
   refuse to do their duty to them, but let them maintain the station in
   which they have been placed. Let there be mutual affection, mutual
   fellow-feeling, (sumpatheia,) mutual concern. Let us have a regard to
   the common advantage, in order that we may not destroy the Church by
   malignity, or envy, or pride, or any disagreement; but may, on the
   contrary, every one of us, strive to the utmost of his power to
   preserve it. Here is a large subject, and a magnificent one; [762] but
   I content myself with having pointed out the way in which the above
   similitude must be applied to the Church.

   Members severally. Chrysostom is of opinion, that this clause is added,
   because the Corinthians were not the universal Church; but this appears
   to me rather forced. [763] I have sometimes thought that it was
   expressive of impropriety, as the Latins say Quodammodo, [764] (in a
   manner.) [765] When, however, I view the whole matter more narrowly, I
   am rather disposed to refer it to that division of members of which he
   had made mention. They are then members severally, according as each
   one has had his portion and definite work assigned him. The context
   itself leads us to this meaning. In this way severally, and as a whole,
   will be opposite terms.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [754] "Nous face restraindre et espargner les vns enuers les autres;"
   -- "Make us restrict and spare ourselves -- one towards another."

   [755] "De s'accommoder et soumettre a l'un des autres membres;" -- To
   accommodate itself, and submit to one of the other members."

   [756] "Comme les poetes ont dit anciennement des geans;" -- "As the
   poets have told of the giants in ancient times." The fabled war of the
   giants with the gods is referred to in Homer's Odyssey, 7, 59, 206; 10,
   120. -- Ed.

   [757] "De peur de perdre temps, and nous gaster en resistant a la
   volonte;" -- "Lest we should lose time, and do hurt to ourselves by
   resisting his will."

   [758] "Un amas de chair inutile;" -- "A heap of useless flesh."

   [759] It is observed by Raphelius, that timen peritithenai "signifies,
   in general, (honorem exhibere,) to give honor; but in this passage, by
   a metonymy, to cover over with a garment those members of the body
   which, if seen, would have a disagreeable and unseemly appearance; and
   this is a kind of honor put upon them." -- Ed

   [760] "Et que ne porte sa vocation;" -- "And does not keep within his
   calling."

   [761] The term is made use of in this sense by classical authors.
   Polyb. 22, 11, 12. See Calvin's Harmony, [29]vol. 2, p. 232. -- Ed.

   [762] "Voyci vne belie matiere riche et abondante;" -- "Here is a fine
   subject, rich and copious."

   [763] It is remarked by Billroth, that "the view of Chrysostom is out
   of place; for such a notion does not pertain to the argumentation of
   the Apostle." Biblical Cabinet, No. 22. -- Ed.

   [764] An instance of this will be found in Cicero de Amicitia, 8. --
   Ed.

   [765] "Comme nous disons en Langue vulgaire, Aucunement;" -- "As we
   say, in common language -- In a manner."
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 12:28-31

   28. And God hath set some in the church, first apostles, secondarily
   prophets, thirdly teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of
   healings, helps, governments, diversities of tongues.

   28. Et altos quidera posuit Deus in Ecclesia, primurn apostolos, deinde
   Prophetas, tertio Doctores, postea Potestates, deinde dona sanationum,
   opitulationes, gubernationes, genera linguarum.

   29. Are all apostles? are all prophets? are all teachers? are all
   workers of miracles?

   29. Numquid omnes Apostoli? numquid omnes Prophetae? numquid omnes
   Doctores? numquid omnes Potestates?

   30. Have all the gifts of healing? do all speak with tongues? do all
   interpret?

   30. Numquid omnes dona habent sanationum? numquid omnes linguis
   loquuntur? numquid omnes interpretantur?

   31. But covet earnestly the best gifts: and yet shew I unto you a more
   excellent way.

   31. Sectamini autem dona potiora. [766]


   He has in the beginning of the chapter spoken of gifts: now he begins
   to treat of offices, and this order it is proper that we should
   carefully observe. For the Lord did not appoint ministers, without
   first endowing them with the requisite gifts, and qualifying them for
   discharging their duty. Hence we must infer, that those are fanatics,
   and actuated by an evil spirit, who intrude themselves into the Church,
   while destitute of the necessary qualifications, as many boast that
   they are under the influence of the Spirit, and glory in a secret call
   from God, while in the meantime they are unlearned and utterly
   ignorant. The natural order, on the other hand, is this -- that gifts
   come before the office to be discharged. As, then, he has taught above,
   that everything that an individual has received from God, should be
   made subservient to the common good, so now he declares that offices
   are distributed in such a manner, that all may together, by united
   efforts, edify the Church, and each individual according to his
   measure. [767]

   28. First, Apostles He does not enumerate all the particular kinds, and
   there was no need of this, for he merely intended to bring forward some
   examples. In the fourth Chapter of the Epistle to the Ephesians,
   (Ephesians 4:11,) there is a fuller enumeration of the offices, that
   are required for the continued government of the Church. The reason of
   this I shall assign there, if the Lord shall permit me to advance so
   far, though even there he does not make mention of them all. As to the
   passage before us, we must observe, that of the offices which Paul
   makes mention of, some are perpetual, others temporary. Those that are
   perpetual, are such as are necessary for the government of the Church;
   those that are temporary, are such as were appointed at the beginning
   for the founding of the Church, and the raising up of Christ's kingdom;
   and these, in a short time afterwards, ceased.

   To the first class belongs the office of Teacher, to the second the
   office of Apostle; for the Lord created the Apostles, that they might
   spread the gospel throughout the whole world, and he did not assign to
   each of them certain limits or parishes, but would have them, wherever
   they went, to discharge the office of ambassadors among all nations and
   languages. In this respect there is a difference between them and
   Pastors, who are, in a manner, tied to their particular churches. For
   the Pastor has not a commission to preach the gospel over the whole
   world, but to take care of the Church that has been committed to his
   charge. In his Epistle to the Ephesians he places Evangelists after the
   Apostles, but here he passes them over; for from the highest order, he
   passes immediately to Prophets

   By this term he means, (in my opinion,) not those who were endowed with
   the gift of prophesying, but those who were endowed with a peculiar
   gift, not merely for interpreting Scripture, but also for applying it
   wisely for present use. [768] My reason for thinking so is this, that
   he prefers prophecy to all other gifts, on the ground of its yielding
   more edification -- a commendation that would not be applicable to the
   predicting of future events. Farther, when he describes the office of
   Prophet, or at least treats of what he ought principally to do, he says
   that he must devote himself to consolation, exhortation, and doctrine.
   Now these are things that are distinct from prophesyings. [769] Let us,
   then, by Prophets in this passage understand, first of all, eminent
   interpreters of Scripture, and farther, persons who are endowed with no
   common wisdom and dexterity in taking a right view of the present
   necessity of the Church, that they may speak suitably to it, and in
   this way be, in a manner, ambassadors to communicate the divine will.

   Between them and Teachers this difference may be pointed out, that the
   office of Teacher consists in taking care that sound doctrines be
   maintained and propagated, in order that the purity of religion may be
   kept up in the Church. At the same time, even this term is taken in
   different senses, and here perhaps it is used rather in the sense of
   Pastor, unless you prefer, it may be, to take it in a general way for
   all that are endowed with the gift of teaching, as in Acts 13:1, where
   also Luke conjoins them with Prophets. My reason for not agreeing with
   those who make the whole of the office of Prophet consist in the
   interpretation of Scripture, is this -- that Paul restricts the number
   of those who ought to speak, to two or three; (1 Corinthians 14:29,)
   which would not accord with a bare interpretation of Scripture. In
   fine, my opinion is this -- that the Prophets here spoken of are those
   who make known the will of God, by applying with dexterity and skill
   prophecies, threatenings, promises, and the whole doctrine of
   Scripture, to the present use of the Church. If any one is of a
   different opinion, I have no objection to his being so, and will not
   raise any quarrel on that account. For it is difficult to form a
   judgment as to gifts and offices of which the Church has been so long
   deprived, excepting only that there are some traces, or shadows of them
   still to be seen.

   As to powers and gift of healings, I have spoken when commenting on
   [30]the 12th Chapter of the Romans. Only it must be observed that here
   he makes mention, not so much of the gifts themselves, as of the
   administration of them. As the Apostle is here enumerating offices, I
   do not approve of what Chrysostom says, that antilepseis, that is,
   helps or aids, consist in supporting the weak. What is it then?
   Undoubtedly, it is either an office, as well as gift, that was
   exercised in ancient times, but of which we have at this day no
   knowledge whatever; or it is connected with the office of Deacon, or in
   other words, the care of the poor; and this latter idea pleases me
   better. [770] In Romans 12:7, he makes mention of two kinds of deacons.
   Of these I have treated when commenting upon that passage.

   By Governments I understand Elders, who had the charge of discipline.
   For the primitive Church had its Senate, [771] for the purpose of
   keeping the people in propriety of deportment, as Paul shows elsewhere,
   when he makes mention of two kinds of Presbyters. [772] (1 Timothy
   5:17.) Hence government consisted of those Presbyters who excelled
   others in gravity, experience, and authority.

   Under different kinds of tongues he comprehends both the knowledge of
   languages, and the gift of interpretation. They were, however, two
   distinct gifts; because in some cases an individual spoke in different
   languages, and yet did not understand the language of the Church with
   which he had to do. This defect was supplied by interpreters. [773]

   29. Are all Apostles? It may indeed have happened, that one individual
   was endowed with many gifts, and sustained two of the offices which he
   has enumerated; nor was there in this any inconsistency. Paul's object,
   however, is to show in the first place, that no one has such a fullness
   in everything as to have a sufficiency within himself, and not require
   the aid of others; and secondly, that offices as well as gifts are
   distributed in such a manner that no one member constitutes the whole
   body, but each contributing his portion to the common advantage, they
   then altogether constitute an entire and perfect body. For Paul means
   here to take away every occasion of proud boasting, base envyings,
   haughtiness, and contempt of the brethren, malignity, ambition, and
   everything of that nature.

   31. Seek after the more excellent gifts. It might also be rendered --
   Value highly; and it would not suit in with the passage, though it
   makes little difference as to the meaning; for Paul exhorts the
   Corinthians to esteem and desire those gifts especially, which are most
   conducive to edification. For this fault prevailed among them -- that
   they aimed at show, rather than usefulness. Hence prophecy was
   neglected, while languages sounded forth among them, with great show,
   indeed, but with little profit. He does not, however, address
   individuals, as though he wished that every one should aspire at
   prophecy, or the office of teacher; but simply recommends to them a
   desire to promote edification, that they may apply themselves the more
   diligently to those things that are most conducive to edification.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [766] "Ou, Soyez couuoiteux des plus excellens dons, ou, estes-vous
   enuieux des plus excellens dons?" -- "Or, Be ambitious of the most
   excellent gifts, or, are you envious of the most excellent gifts?"

   [767] "Selon sa portion et mesure;" -- "According to his portion and
   measure."

   [768] "De l'accommoder prudemment, et l'appliquer en vsage selon les
   personnes et le temps;" -- "To make use of it wisely, and apply it to
   use according to persons and time."

   [769] "Et advertissemens des choses a venir;" -- "And intimations or
   things to come."

   [770] This view of the import of the term antilepseis, (helps,) is
   generally acquiesced in by modern interpreters. It is remarked by Dr.
   Dick, (in his Theology, volume iv, p. 390,) that "there are no persons
   who may be so reasonably supposed to be meant by helps, as deacons;"
   who "were instituted for the express purpose of helping the Apostles,
   for the purpose of relieving them from the care of the poor, that they
   might devote themselves exclusively to the ministry of the word." He
   observes also, (p.389,) that "it does not follow, because some of the
   offices and ministrations enumerated in this place were miraculous and
   extraordinary, that they were all of that description." -- Ed

   [771] "Auoit comme son Senate, ou Consistoire;" -- "Had its Senate, as
   it were, or Consistory."

   [772] "Deux ordres de Prestres: c'est a dire d'Anciens;" -- "Two kinds
   of Presbyters: that is to say, Elders."

   [773] Our Author repeats here what he had stated when commenting on
   [31]verse 10th. -- Ed.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 13
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 13:1-3

   1. Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not
   charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal.

   1. Et adhuc excellentiorem viam vobis demonstro. Si linguis hominum
   loquar et Angelorum, caritatem autem non habeam, factus sum tympanum
   sonans, aut cymbalum tinniens.

   2. And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all
   mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I
   could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing.

   2. Et si habeam prophetiam, et noverim mysteria omnia omnemque
   scientiam, et si habeam omnem fidem, adeo ut montes loco dimoveam,
   caritatem autem non habeam, nihil sum.

   3. And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give
   my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing.

   3. Et si insumam in alimoniam omnes facultates meas, et si tradam
   corpus meum ut comburar, caritatem autem non habeam, nihil mihi
   prodest.


   The division of the Chapter being so absurd, I could not refrain from
   changing it, especially as I could not conveniently interpret it
   otherwise. For what purpose did it serve to connect with what goes
   before a detached sentence, which agrees so well with what comes after
   -- nay more, is thereby rendered complete? It is likely, that it
   happened through a mistake on the part of the transcribers. However it
   may be as to this, after having commanded that regard should be had
   chiefly to edification, he now declares that he will show them
   something of greater importance -- that everything be regulated
   according to the rule of love. This, then, is the most excellent way,
   when love is the regulating principle of all our actions. And, in the
   outset, he proceeds upon this -- that all excellencies [774] are of no
   value without love; for nothing is so excellent or estimable as not to
   be vitiated in the sight of God, if love [775] is wanting. Nor does he
   teach anything here but what he does elsewhere, when he declares, that
   it is the end of the law, and the bond of perfection, (1 Timothy 1:5,)
   and also when he makes the holiness of the godly consist entirely in
   this, (Colossians 3:14,) -- for what else does God require from us in
   the second Table of the Law? It is not then to be wondered, if all our
   deeds are estimated by this test -- their appearing to proceed from
   love. It is also not to be wondered, if gifts, otherwise excellent,
   come to have their true value only when they are made subservient to
   love.

   1. If should speak with the tongues of men. He begins with eloquence,
   which is, it is true, an admirable gift, considered in itself, but,
   when apart from love, does not recommend a man in the estimation of
   God. When he speaks of the tongue of angels, he uses a hyperbolical
   expression to denote what is singular, or distinguished. At the same
   time, I explain it rather as referring to the diversity of languages,
   which the Corinthians held in much esteem, measuring everything by
   ambition -- not by fruit. [776] "Make yourself master," says he, "of
   all the languages, not of men merely, but even of Angels. You have, in
   that case, no reason to think, that you are of higher estimation in the
   sight of God than a mere cymbal, if you have not love."

   2. And if I should have the gift of prophecy. He brings down to nothing
   the dignity of even this endowment, [777] which, nevertheless, he had
   preferred to all others. To know all mysteries, might seem to be added
   to the term prophecy, by way of explanation, but as the term knowledge
   is immediately added, of which he had previously made mention by
   itself, (1 Corinthians 12:8,) it will deserve your consideration,
   whether the knowledge of mysteries may not be used here to mean wisdom.
   As for myself, while I would not venture to affirm that it is so, I am
   much inclined to that opinion.

   That faith, of which he speaks, is special, as is evident from the
   clause that is immediately added -- so that I remove mountains Hence
   the Sophists accomplish nothing, when they pervert this passage for the
   purpose of detracting from the excellence of faith. As, therefore, the
   term faith is (polusemon) used in a variety of senses, it is the part
   of the prudent reader to observe in what signification it is taken.
   Paul, however, as I have already stated, is his own interpreter, by
   restricting faith, here, to miracles. It is what Chrysostom calls the
   "faith of miracles," and what we term a "special faith," because it
   does not apprehend a whole Christ, but simply his power in working
   miracles; and hence it may sometimes exist in a man without the Spirit
   of sanctification, as it did in Judas. [778]

   3. And if I should expend all my possessions. [779] This, it is true,
   is worthy of the highest praise, if considered in itself; but as
   liberality in many cases proceeds from ambition -- not from true
   generosity, or even the man that is liberal is destitute of the other
   departments of love, (for even liberality, that is inwardly felt, is
   only one department of love,) it may happen that a work, otherwise so
   commendable, has, indeed, a fair show in the sight of men, and is
   applauded by them, and yet is regarded as nothing in the sight of God.

   And if I should give up my body. He speaks, undoubtedly, of martyrdom,
   which is an act that is the most lovely and excellent of all; for what
   is more admirable than that invincible fortitude of mind, which makes a
   man not hesitate to pour out his life for the testimony of the gospel?
   Yet even this, too, God regards as nothing, if the mind is destitute of
   love. The kind of punishment that he makes mention of was not then so
   common among Christians; for we read that tyrants, at that time, set
   themselves to destroy the Church, rather by swords than by flames,
   [780] except that Nero, in his rage, had recourse, also, to burning.
   The Spirit appears, however, to have predicted here, by Paul's mouth,
   the persecutions that were coming. But this is a digression. The main
   truth in the passage is this -- that as love is the only rule of our
   actions, and the only means of regulating the right use of the gifts of
   God, nothing, in the absence of it, is approved of by God, however
   magnificent it may be in the estimation of men. For where it is
   wanting, the beauty of all virtues is mere tinsel -- is empty sound --
   is not worth a straw -- nay more, is offensive and disgusting. As for
   the inference which Papists draw from this -- that love is therefore of
   more avail for our justification than faith, we shall refute it
   afterwards. At present, we must proceed to notice what follows,
     __________________________________________________________________

   [774] "Quelles qu'elles soyent;" -- "Whatever they are."

   [775] Penn, in his Annotations, gives the following account of the term
   charity, as made use of in our English translation -- "If the Latin
   version had not rendered agape, in this place, by charitas,' instead of
   amor -- love,' we should not have found the word charity' in our
   English version. But Wiclif, who only knew the Latin Scripture, adopted
   from it that word, and rendered, and I have not charite.' When the
   knowledge of the Greek was acquired by our learned Reformers, the first
   revisers of Wiclif were sensible of the unsuitableness of this
   translation, and rendered this clause -- and yet had no love,' as it is
   printed in the Newe Testament in Englishe and Latin, of 1548;' and they
   rendered agape -- love,' throughout this chapter. Our last revisers
   abandoned this sound correction of their immediate predecessors, and
   brought back the Latinising charity' of Wiclif, who was only excusable
   for employing that word, because he translated from a Latin text, in
   ignorance of its Greek original." -- Ed

   [776] "Par le fruit qui s'en pouuoit ensuyure;" -- "By the fruit that
   might result from it."

   [777] "La dignite mesme de la prophetie;" -- "The dignity even of
   prophecy."

   [778] The reader will observe, that this is, in substance, what has
   been stated by Calvin previously, when commenting on [32]1 Corinthians
   12:10. -- Ed.

   [779] "Et si ie distribue tous mes biens;" -- "And if I should
   distribute all my goods."

   [780] "Les tyrans faisoyent plustot traneher la teste aux Chrestiens et
   vsoyent plustot du glaiue que du feu pour destruire l'Egiise;" --
   "Tyrants practiced rather the beheading of Christians, and made use of
   the sword, rather than of fire, for the destruction of the Church."
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 13:4-8

   4. Charity suffereth long, and is kind; charity envieth not; charity
   vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up,

   4. Caritaspatiens est, benigne agit, caritas non aemulatur, caritas non
   agit insolenter, non inflatur:

   5. Doth not behave itself unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not easily
   provoked, thinketh no evil;

   5. Non agit indecenter, non quaerit sua ipsius, non provocatur, non
   cogitat malum:

   6. Rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth;

   6. Non gaudet obiniustitiam, con gaudet autem veritati.

   7. Beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things,
   endureth all things.

   7. Omnia fert, omnia credit, omnia sperat, omnia sustinet.

   8. Charity never faileth: but whether there be prophecies, they shall
   fail; whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether there be
   knowledge, it shall vanish away.

   8. Caritas nunquam excidit: sive prophetiae abolebuntur, sive linguae
   cessabunt, sive scientia destruetur.


   4. Love is patient. He now commends love from its effects or fruits,
   though at the same time these eulogiums are not intended merely for its
   commendation, but to make the Corinthians understand what are its
   offices, and what is its nature. The object, however, mainly in view,
   is to show how necessary it is for preserving the unity of the Church.
   I have also no doubt that he designed indirectly to reprove the
   Corinthians, by setting before them a contrast, in which they might
   recognize, by way of contraries, their own vices.

   The first commendation of love is this -- that, by patient endurance of
   many things, it promotes peace and harmony in the Church. Near akin to
   this is the second excellence -- gentleness and lenity, for such is the
   meaning of the verb chresteuesthai [781] A third excellence is -- that
   it counteracts emulation, the seed of all contentions. Under emulation
   he comprehends envy, which is a vice near akin to it, or rather, he
   means that emulation, which is connected with envy, and frequently
   springs from it. Hence where envy reigns -- where every one is desirous
   to be the first, or appear so, love there has no place.

   What I have rendered -- does not act insolently -- is in the Greek
   chresteuesthai Erasmus has rendered it, is not froward. [782] It is
   certain that the word has different significations; but, as it is
   sometimes taken to mean -- being fierce, or insolent, through
   presumption, this meaning seemed to be more suitable to the passage
   before us. [783] Paul, therefore, ascribes to love moderation, and
   declares that it is a bridle to restrain men, that they may not break
   forth into ferocity, but may live together in a peaceable and orderly
   manner. He adds, farther, that it has nothing of the nature of pride.
   [784] That man, then, who is governed by love, is not puffed up with
   pride, so as to despise others and feel satisfied with himself. [785]

   5. Doth not behave itself unseemly Erasmus renders it "Is not
   disdainful;" but as he quotes no author in support of this
   interpretation, I have preferred to retain its proper and usual
   signification. I explain it, however, in this way -- that love does not
   exult in a foolish ostentation, or does not bluster, but observes
   moderation and propriety. And in this manner, he again reproves the
   Corinthians indirectly, because they shamefully set at naught all
   propriety by an unseemly haughtiness. [786]

   Seeketh not its own. From this we may infer, how very far we are from
   having love implanted in us by nature; for we are naturally prone to
   have love and care for ourselves, and aim at our own advantage. Nay, to
   speak more correctly, we rush headlong into it. [787] For so perverse
   an inclination the remedy [788] is love, which leads us to leave off
   caring for ourselves, and feel concerned for our neighbors, so as to
   love them and be concerned for their welfare. Farther, to seek one's
   own things, [789] is to be devoted to self, and to be wholly taken up
   with concern for one's own advantage. This definition solves the
   question, whether it is lawful for a Christian to be concerned for his
   own advantage? for Paul does not here reprove every kind of care or
   concern for ourselves, but the excess of it, which proceeds from an
   immoderate and blind attachment to ourselves. Now the excess lies in
   this -- if we think of ourselves so as to neglect others, or if the
   desire of our own advantage calls us off from that concern, which God
   commands us to have as to our neighbors. [790] He adds, that love is
   also a bridle to repress quarrels, and this follows from the first two
   statements. For where there is gentleness and forbearance, persons in
   that case do not, on a sudden, become angry, and are not easily stirred
   up to disputes and contests. [791]

   7. Beareth all things, etc. By all these statements he intimates, that
   love is neither impatient nor spiteful. For to bear and endure all
   things is the part of forbearance to believe and hope all things is the
   part of candor and kindness. As we are naturally too much devoted to
   self, this vice renders us morose and peevish. The effect is, that
   every one wishes that others should carry him upon their shoulders, but
   refuses for his part to assist others. The remedy for this disease is
   love, which makes us subject to our brethren, and teaches us to apply
   our shoulders to their burdens. (Galatians 6:2.) Farther, as we are
   naturally spiteful, we are, consequently, suspicious too, and take
   almost everything amiss. Love, on the other hand, calls us back to
   kindness, so that we think favorably and candidly of our neighbors.

   When he says all things, you must understand him as referring to the
   things that ought to be endured, and in such a manner as is befitting.
   For we are not to bear with vices, so as to give our sanction to them
   by flattery, or, by winking at them, encourage them through our
   supineness. Farther, this endurance does not exclude corrections and
   just punishments. The case is the same as to kindness in judging of
   things.

   Love believeth all things -- not that the Christian knowingly and
   willingly allows himself to be imposed upon -- not that he divests
   himself of prudence and judgment, that he may be the more easily taken
   advantage of -- not that he unlearns the way of distinguishing black
   from white. What then? He requires here, as I have already said,
   simplicity and kindness in judging of things; and he declares that
   these [792] are the invariable accompaniments of love. The consequence
   will be, that a Christian man will reckon it better to be imposed upon
   by his own kindness and easy temper, than to wrong his brother by an
   unfriendly suspicion.

   8. Love never faileth Here we have another excellence of love -- that
   it endures for ever. There is good reason why we should eagerly desire
   an excellence that will never come to an end. Hence love must be
   preferred before temporary and perishable gifts. Prophesyings have an
   end, tongues fail, knowledge ceases Hence love is more excellent than
   they on this ground -- that, while they fail, it survives.

   Papists pervert this passage, for the purpose of establishing the
   doctrine which they have contrived, without any authority from
   Scripture -- that the souls of the deceased pray to God on our behalf.
   For they reason in this manner: "Prayer is a perpetual office of love
   -- love endures in the souls of departed saints -- therefore they pray
   for us." For my part, although I should not wish to contend too keenly
   on this point, yet, in order that they may not think that they have
   gained much by having this conceded to them, I reply to their objection
   in a few words.

   In the first place, though love endures for ever, it does not
   necessarily follow that it is (as the expression is) in constant
   exercise. For what is there to hinder our maintaining that the saints,
   being now in the enjoyment of calm repose, do not exercise love in
   present offices? [793] What absurdity, I pray you, would there be in
   this? In the second place, were I to maintain, that it is not a
   perpetual office of love to intercede for the brethren, how would they
   prove the contrary? That a person may intercede for another, it is
   necessary that he be acquainted with his necessity. If we may
   conjecture as to the state of the dead, it is a more probable
   supposition, that departed saints are ignorant of what is doing here,
   than that they are aware of our necessities. Papists, it is true,
   imagine, that they see the whole world in the reflection of light which
   they enjoy in the vision of God; but it is a profane and altogether
   heathenish contrivance, which has more of the savor of Egyptian
   theology, [794] than it has of accordance with Christian philosophy.
   What, then, if I should maintain that the saints, being ignorant of our
   condition, are not concerned in reference to us? With what argument
   will Papists press me, so as to constrain me to hold their opinion?
   What if I should affirm, that they are so occupied and swallowed up, as
   it were, in the vision of God, that they think of nothing besides? How
   will they prove that this is not agreeable to reason? What if I should
   reply, that the perpetuity of love, here mentioned by the Apostle, will
   be after the last day, and has nothing to do with the time that is
   intermediate? What if I should say that the office of mutual
   intercession has been enjoined only upon the living, and those that are
   sojourning in this world, and consequently does not at all extend to
   the departed?

   But I have already said more than enough; for the very point for which
   they contend I leave undetermined, that I may not raise any contention
   upon a matter that does not call for it. It was, however, of importance
   to notice, in passing, how little support is given them from this
   passage, in which they think they have so strong a bulwark. Let us
   reckon it enough, that it has no support from any declaration of
   scripture, and that, consequently, it is maintained by them rashly and
   inconsiderately. [795]

   Whether knowledge, it will be destroyed. We have already seen the
   meaning of these words; but from this arises a question of no small
   importances whether those who in this world excel either in learning,
   or in other gifts, will be on a level with idiots in the kingdom of
   God? In the first place, I should wish to admonish [796] pious readers,
   not to harass themselves more than is meet in the investigation of
   these things. Let them rather seek the way by which the kingdom of God
   is arrived at, than curiously inquire, what is to be our condition
   there; for the Lord himself has, by his silence, called us back from
   such curiosity. I now return to the question. So far as I can
   conjecture, and am able even to gather in part from this passage --
   inasmuch as learning, knowledge of languages, and similar gifts are
   subservient to the necessity of this life, I do not think that there
   will be any of them then remaining. The learned, however, will sustain
   no loss from the want of them, inasmuch as they will receive the fruit
   of them, which is greatly to be preferred. [797]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [781] The distinction between the. first and second of the
   commendations here bestowed upon love is stated by Bloomfield as
   follows: Makrothumei, "denotes lenity, as opposed to passion and
   revenge: and chresteuetai, gentleness, as opposed to severity and
   misanthropy." -- Ed

   [782] This rendering is followed in two of the old English
   translations, viz. Tyndale (1534) and Cranmer (1539.) "Love doth not
   frowardly." -- Ed.

   [783] Interpreters are by no means agreed as to the precise import of
   the original term perpereuetai. Most ancient and many modern
   commentators explain it as meaning -- "to act precipitately and rashly"
   -- and in accordance with this, is the rendering given by our
   Translators in the Margin -- is not rash No single expression, however,
   appears to bring out more satisfactorily the import of the original
   word than that which our Translators have inserted in the text --
   vaunteth not itself. Beausobre makes use of two epithets. "N'est point
   vaine et insolerite;" -- "Is not vain and insolent." -- Ed

   [784] "I1 dit consequemment que charite ne s'enfle point;" -- "He says
   consequently, that love is not puffed up."

   [785] Bloomfield considers the distinction between this clause and the
   preceding one to be this, that the former "refers to pride as shown in
   words, and the latter to "the carriage and bearing, to denote pride and
   haughtiness on account of certain external advantages. A similar view
   is taken by Barnes, who considers the former clause as referring to
   "the expression of the feelings of pride, vanity," etc.; and the
   latter, to "the feeling itself." -- Ed.

   [786] The proper meaning of the verb aschemonein, is to offend against
   decorum See Eurip. Hec 407. -- Ed

   [787] "Nons sommes transportez-la, et nous-nous y iettons sans
   moderation aucune;" -- "We are hurried into it, and rush into it
   without any restraint.

   [788] "Le remede unique," -- "The only remedy."

   [789] "Car il y a ainsi a le traduire mot a mot;" -- "For that is the
   literal meaning."

   [790] Granville Penn translates the clause as follows: "Seeketh not
   what is not its own," -- in accordance with the reading of the Vat. MS.
   Ou zetei ta me eautos (Seeketh not the things that are not its own.) He
   supposes the mo (not) to have "lapsed, or been erroneously rejected
   from all the later copies." -- Ed

   [791] The last clause of the verse, which is in our translation,
   thinketh no evil, is rendered by Bishop Pearce, "meditateth no
   mischief" -- a sense in which the expression (p.424) logizesthai kakon
   occurs in the Septuagint, in Psalm 35:4, and 41:7. It is beautifully
   rendered by Bloomfield, "does not enter it into a note-book, for future
   revenge. -- Ed

   [792] "Ceux deux vertus;" -- "These two virtues."

   [793] "En secourant et aidant presentement a ceux qui sont en ce
   monde;" -- "In presently succouring and aiding those that are in this
   world."

   [794] "See Institutes, volume 1. -- Ed.

   [795] "C'est folie et presomption grande a eux de l'affermer;" -- "It
   is great folly and presumption in them to affirm it."

   [796] "En premier lieu, i'admoneste et prie;" -- "In the first place, I
   admonish and beseech."

   [797] "Qui est plus excellent sans comparaison;" -- "Which is, beyond
   comparison, more excellent."
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 13:9-13-

   9. For we know in part, and we prophesy in part.

   9. Ex parte enim cognoscimus, et ex parte prophetamus:

   10. But when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part
   shall be done away.

   10. At ubi venerit quod perfectum est, tunc, quod ex parte est,
   abolebitur.

   11. When I was a child, I spake as a child, I understood as a child, I
   thought as a child: but when I became a man, I put away childish
   things.

   11. Quum essem puer, ut puer loquebar, ut puer sentiebam, ut puer
   cogitabam: at postquam factus sum vir, abolevi puerilia.

   12. For now we see through a glass, darkly; but then face to face: now
   I know in part; but then shall I know even as also I am known.

   12. Cernimus enim nunc per speculum in aenigmate: tunc autem facie ad
   faciem: nunc cognosco ex parte: tune vero cognoscam, quem admodum et
   cognitus sum.

   13. And now abideth faith, hope, charity, these three; but the greatest
   of these is charity.

   13. Nunc autem manet fides, spes, caritas, tria haec: sed maxima ex his
   est caritas.


   He now proves that prophecy, and other gifts of that nature, are done
   away, [798] because they are conferred upon us to help our infirmity.
   Now our imperfection will one day have an end. Hence the use, even of
   those gifts, will, at the same time, be discontinued, for it were
   absurd that they should remain and be of no use. They will, therefore,
   perish. This subject he pursues to the end of the chapter.

   9. We know in part This passage is misinterpreted by most persons, as
   if it meant that our knowledge, and in like manner our prophecy, is not
   yet perfect, but that we are daily making progress in them. Paul's
   meaning, however, is -- that it is owing to our imperfection that we at
   present have knowledge and prophecy. Hence the phrase in part means --
   "Because we are not yet perfect." Knowledge and prophecy, therefore,
   have place among us so long as that imperfection cleaves to us, to
   which they are helps. It is true, indeed, that we ought to make
   progress during our whole life, and that everything that we have is
   merely begun. Let us observe, however, what Paul designs to prove --
   that the gifts in question are but temporary. Now he proves this from
   the circumstance, that the advantage of them is only for a time -- so
   long as we aim at the mark by making progress every day.

   10. When that which is perfect is come "When the goal has been reached,
   then the helps in the race will be done away." He retains, however, the
   form of expression that he had already made use of, when he contrasts
   perfection with what is in part "Perfection," says he, "when it will
   arrive, will put an end to everything that aids imperfection." But when
   will that perfection come? It begins, indeed, at death, for then we put
   off, along with the body, many infirmities; but it will not be
   completely manifested until the day of judgment, as we shall hear
   presently. Hence we infer, that the whole of this discussion is
   ignorantly applied to the time that is intermediate.

   11. When I was a child He illustrates what he had said, by a
   similitude. For there are many things that are suitable to children,
   which are afterwards done away on arriving at maturity. For example,
   education is necessary for childhood; it does not comport with mature
   age. [799] So long as we live in this world, we require, in some sense,
   education. We are far from having attained, as yet, the perfection of
   wisdom. That perfection, therefore, which will be in a manner a
   maturity of spiritual age, will put an end to education and its
   accompaniments. In his Epistle to the Ephesians, (Ephesians 4:14,) he
   exhorts us to be no longer children; but he has there another
   consideration in view, of which we shall speak when we come to that
   passage.

   12. We now see through a glass Here we have the application of the
   similitude. "The measure of knowledge, that we now have, is suitable to
   imperfection and childhood, as it were; for we do not as yet see
   clearly the mysteries of the heavenly kingdom, and we do not as yet
   enjoy a distinct view of them." To express this, he makes use of
   another similitude -- that we now see only as in a glass, and therefore
   but obscurely. This obscurity he expresses by the term enigma [800]

   In the first place, there can be no doubt that it is the ministry of
   the word, and the means that are required for the exercise of it, that
   he compares to a looking-glass For God, who is otherwise invisible, has
   appointed these means for discovering himself to us. At the same time,
   this may also be viewed as extending to the entire structure of the
   world, in which the glory of God shines forth to our view, in
   accordance with what is stated in Romans 1:16; and 2 Corinthians 3:18.
   In Romans 1:20 the Apostle speaks of the creatures as mirrors, [801] in
   which God's invisible majesty is to be seen; but as he treats here
   particularly of spiritual gifts, which are subservient to the ministry
   of the Church, and are its accompaniments, we shall not wander away
   from our present subject.

   The ministry of the word, I say, is like a looking-glass For the angels
   have no need of preaching, or other inferior helps, nor of sacraments,
   for they enjoy a vision of God of another kind; [802] and God does not
   give them a view of his face merely in a mirror, but openly manifests
   himself as present with them. We, who have not as yet reached that
   great height, behold the image of God as it is presented before us in
   the word, in the sacraments, and, in fine, in the whole of the service
   of the Church. This vision Paul here speaks of as partaking of
   obscurity -- not as though it were doubtful or delusive, but because it
   is not so distinct as that which will be at last afforded on the final
   day. He teaches the same thing in other words, in the second Epistle --
   (2 Corinthians 5:7) -- that,

   so long as we dwell in the body we are absent from the Lord;
   for we walk by faith, not by sight.

   Our faith, therefore, at present beholds God as absent. How so? Because
   it sees not his face, but rests satisfied with the image in the mirror;
   but when we shall have left the world, and gone to him, it will behold
   him as near and before its eyes.

   Hence we must understand it in this manner -- that the knowledge of
   God, which we now have from his word, is indeed certain and true, and
   has nothing in it that is confused, or perplexed, or dark, but is
   spoken of as comparatively obscure, because it comes far short of that
   clear manifestation to which we look forward; for then we shall see
   face to face [803] Thus this passage is not at all at variance with
   other passages, which speak of the clearness, at one time, of the law,
   at another time, of the entire Scripture, but more especially of the
   gospel. For we have in the word (in so far as is expedient for us) a
   naked and open revelation of God, and it has nothing intricate in it,
   to hold us in suspense, as wicked persons imagine; [804] but how small
   a proportion does this bear to that vision, which we have in our eye!
   Hence it is only in a comparative sense, that it is termed obscure.

   The adverb then denotes the last day, rather than the time that is
   immediately subsequent to death. At the same time, although full vision
   will be deferred until the day of Christ, a nearer view of God will
   begin to be enjoyed immediately after death, when our souls, set free
   from the body, will have no more need of the outward ministry, or other
   inferior helps. Paul, however, as I noticed a little ago, does not
   enter into any close discussion as to the state of the dead, because
   the knowledge of that is not particularly serviceable to piety.

   Now I know in part That is, the measure of our present knowledge is
   imperfect, as John says in his Epistle, (1 John 3:1,2,) that

   we know, indeed, that we are the sons of God,
   but that it doth not yet appear, until we shall see God as he is.

   Then we shall see God -- not in his image, but in himself, so that
   there will be, in a manner, a mutual view.

   13. But now remaineth faith, hope, love. This is a conclusion from what
   goes before -- that love is more excellent than other gifts; but in
   place of the enumeration of gifts that he had previously made, he now
   puts faith and hope along with love, as all those gifts are
   comprehended under this summary. For what is the object of the entire
   ministry, but that we may be instructed as to these things? [805] Hence
   the term faith has a larger acceptation here, than in previous
   instances; for it is as though he had said -- "There are, it is true,
   many and various gifts, but they all point to this object, and have an
   eye to it."

   To remain, then, conveys the idea, that, as in the reckoning up of an
   account, when everything has been deducted, this is the sum that
   remains For faith does not remain after death, inasmuch as the Apostle
   elsewhere contrasts it with sight, (2 Corinthians 5:7,) and declares
   that it remains only so long as we are absent from the Lord We are now
   in possession of what is meant by faith in this passage -- that
   knowledge of God and of the divine will, which we obtain by the
   ministry of the Church; or, if you prefer it, faith universal, and
   taken in its proper acceptation. Hope is nothing else than perseverance
   in faith For when we have once believed the word of God, it remains
   that we persevere until the accomplishment of these things. Hence, as
   faith is the mother of hope, so it is kept up by it, so as not to give
   way.

   The greatest of these is love. It is so, if we estimate its excellence
   by the effects which he has previously enumerated; and farther, if we
   take into view its perpetuity. For every one derives advantage from his
   own faith and hope, but love extends its benefits to others. Faith and
   hope belong to a state of imperfection: love will remain even in a
   state of perfection. For if we single out the particular effects of
   faith, and compare them, faith will be found to be in many respects
   superior. Nay, even love itself, according to the testimony of the same
   Apostle, (1 Thessalonians 1:3,) is an effect of faith Now the effect
   is, undoubtedly, inferior to its cause.

   Besides, there is bestowed upon faith a signal commendation, which does
   not apply to love, when John declares that it is our victory, which
   overcometh the world. (1 John 5:4.) In fine, it is by faith that we are
   born against that we become the sons of God -- that we obtain eternal
   life, and that Christ dwells in us. (Ephesians 3:17.) Innumerable other
   things I pass over; but these few are sufficient to prove what I have
   in view -- that faith is, in many of its effects, superior to love.
   Hence it is evident, that it is declared here to be superior -- not in
   every respect, but inasmuch as it will be perpetual, and holds at
   present the first place in the preservation of the Church.

   It is, however, surprising how much pleasure Papists take in thundering
   forth these words. "If faith justifies," say they, "then much more does
   love, which is declared to be greater." A solution of this objection is
   already furnished from what I have stated, but let us grant that love
   is in every respect superior; what sort of reasoning is that -- that
   because it is greater, therefore it is of more avail for justifying
   men! Then a king will plow the ground better than a husbandman, and he
   will make a shoe better than a shoemaker, because he is more noble than
   either! Then a man will run faster than a horse, and will carry a
   heavier burden than an elephant, because he is superior in dignity!
   Then angels will give light to the earth better than the sun and moon,
   because they are more excellent! If the power of justifying depended on
   the dignity or merit of faith they might perhaps be listened to; but we
   do not teach that faith justifies, on the ground of its having more
   worthiness, or occupying a higher station of honor, but because it
   receives the righteousness which is freely offered in the gospel.
   Greatness or dignity has nothing to do with this. Hence this passage
   gives Papists no more help, than if the Apostle had given the
   preference to faith above everything else.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [798] "Seront un iour abolis;" -- "Will one day be done away."

   [799] "Elle ne conuient point a ceux qui sont en aage de discretion;"
   -- "It does not become those who are at the age of discretion?'

   [800] The original term ainigma, (enigma,) properly means, a dark
   saying It is employed by classical writers in this sense. See Pind. Fr.
   165. Aeseh. Pr. 610. The Apostle is generally supposed to have had in
   his eye Numbers 12:8, which is rendered in the Septuagint as follows:
   Stoma kata stoma laleso auto en eidei, kai ou di ' ainigmaton; -- "I
   will speak to him mouth to mouth in a vision, and not by dark sayings."
   -- Ed

   [801] "Et l'Apostre, en l'onzieme aux Heb., d. 13, nomme les creatures,
   miroirs;" -- "And the Apostle, in Hebrews 11:13, speaks of the
   creatures as mirrors." There is obviously a mistake here in the
   quotation. Most probably Calvin had in his eye Hebrews 11:3, as a
   passage similar in substance to Romans 1:20, quoted by him in his Latin
   Commentary. -- Ed.

   [802] "Ils ont vn autre iouissance de la presence de Dieu;" -- "They
   have another enjoyment of the presence of God."

   [803] "The blessed God's manifestation of himself," say's Mr. Howe, "is
   emphatically expressed in 1 Corinthians 13:12 -- of seeing face to
   face, which signifies on his part, gracious vouchsafement, -- his
   offering his blessed face to view, -- that he hides it not, nor turns
   it away, as here sometimes he doth, in just displeasure. And his face
   means, even his most conspicuous glory, such as, in this state of
   mortality, it would be mortal to us to behold; for no man,' not so
   divine a man as Moses himself, could see his face and live.' And it
   signifies, on their part who are thus made perfect, their applying and
   turning their face towards his, viz., that they see not casually, or by
   fortuitous glances, but eye to eye, by direct and most voluntary
   intuition; which, therefore, on their part, implies moral perfection,
   the will directing and commanding the eye, and upon inexpressible
   relishes of joy and pleasure, forbidding its diversion, holds it steady
   and intent." Howe's Works, (Lond. 1834,) p. 1016. -- Ed.

   [804] "Comme imaginent les moqueurs et gens profanes;" -- "As scoffers
   and profane persons imagine."

   [805] "En ces trois choses;" -- "In these three things."
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   CHAPTER 14
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 14:1-6

   1. Follow after charity, and desire spiritual gifts, but rather that ye
   may prophesy.

   1. Sectamini caritatem: aemulamini spiritualia, magis autem ut
   prophetetis.

   2. For he that speaketh in an unknown tongue speaketh not unto men, but
   unto God: for no man understandeth him; howbeit in the spirit he
   speaketh mysteries.

   2. Nam qui loquitur lingua, non hominibus loquitur sed Deo: nullus enim
   audit; Spiritu vero loquitur mysteria.

   3. But he that prophesieth speaketh unto men to edification, and
   exhortation, and comfort.

   3. Caeterum qui prophetat, heminibus loquitur ad aedificationem,
   exhortationem, et consolationem.

   4. He that speaketh in an unknown tongue edifieth himself; but he that
   prophesieth edifieth the church.

   4. Qui loquitur lingua, se ipsum aedificat; at qui prophetat, Ecclesiam
   aedificat.

   5. I would that ye all spake with tongues, but rather that ye
   prophesied: for greater is he that prophesieth than he that speaketh
   with tongues, except he interpret, that the church may receive
   edifying.

   5. Volo autem omnes vos loqui linguis, magis tamen ut prophetetis;
   maior enim qui prophetat, quam qui linguis loquitur; nisi
   interpretetur, ut Ecclesia aedificationem accipiat.

   6. Now, brethren, if I come unto you speaking with tongues, what shall
   I profit you, except I shall speak to you either by revelation, or by
   knowledge, or by prophesying, or by doctrine?

   6. Nunc autem, fratres, si venero ad vos linguis loquens, quil vobis
   prodero, nisi vobis loquar aut per revelationem, aut per scientiam, aut
   per prophetiam, aut per doctrinam?


   As he had previously exhorted them to follow after the more excellent
   gifts, (1 Corinthians 12:31,) so he exhorts them now to follow after
   love, [806] for that was the distinguished excellence, [807] which he
   had promised that he would show them. They will, therefore, regulate
   themselves with propriety in the use of gifts, if love prevails among
   them. For he tacitly reproves the want of love, as appearing in this --
   that they had hitherto abused their gifts, and, inferring from what
   goes before, that where they do not assign to love the chief place,
   they do not take the right road to the attainment of true excellence,
   he shows them how foolish their ambition is, which frustrates their
   hopes and desires.

   1. Covet spiritual gifts. Lest the Corinthians should object that they
   wronged God, if they despised his gifts, the Apostle anticipates this
   objection by declaring, that it was not his design to draw them away
   even from those gifts that they had abused -- nay rather he commends
   the pursuit of them, and wishes them to have a place in the Church. And
   assuredly, as they had been conferred for the advantage of the Church,
   man's abuse of them ought not to give occasion for their being thrown
   away as useless or injurious, but in the meantime he commends prophecy
   above all other gifts, as it was the most useful of them all. He
   observes, therefore, an admirable medium, by disapproving of nothing
   that was useful, while at the same time he exhorts them not to prefer,
   by an absurd zeal, things of less consequence to what was of primary
   importance. Now he assigns the first place to prophecy. Covet,
   therefore, spiritual gifts -- that is, "Neglect no gift, for I exhort
   you to seek after them all, provided only prophecy holds the first
   place."

   2. For he that speaketh in another [808] tongue, speaketh, etc. He now
   shows from the effect, why it was that he preferred prophecy to other
   gifts, and he compares it with the gift of tongues, in which it is
   probable the Corinthians exercised themselves the more, because it had
   more of show connected with it, for when persons hear a man speaking in
   a foreign tongue, their admiration is commonly excited. He accordingly
   shows, from principles already assumed, how perverse a thing this is,
   inasmuch as it does not at all contribute to the edifying of the
   Church. He says in the outset -- He that speaketh in another tongue,
   speaketh not unto men, but unto God: that is, according to the proverb,
   "He sings to himself and to the Muses." [809] In the use of the word
   tongue, there is not a pleonasm, [810] as in those expressions -- "She
   spake thus with her mouth," and "I caught the sound with these ears."
   The term denotes a foreign language. The reason why he does not speak
   to men is -- because no one heareth, that is, as an articulate voice.
   For all hear a sound, but they do not understand what is said.

   He speaketh in the Spirit -- that is, "by a spiritual gift, (for in
   this way I interpret it along with Chrysostom.) He speaketh mysteries
   and hidden things, and things, therefore, that are of no profit."
   Chrysostom understands mysteries here in a good sense, as meaning --
   special revelations from God. I understand the term, however, in a bad
   sense, as meaning -- dark sayings, that are obscure and involved, as if
   he had said, "He speaks what no one understands."

   3. He that prophesieth, speaketh unto men "Prophecy," says he, "is
   profitable to all, while a foreign language is a treasure hid in the
   earth. What great folly, then, it is to spend all one's time in what is
   useless, and, on the other hand, to neglect what appears to be most
   useful!" To speak to edification, is to speak what contains doctrine
   fitted to edify. For I understand this term to mean doctrine, by which
   we are trained to piety, to faith, to the worship and fear of God, and
   the duties of holiness and righteousness. As, however, we have for the
   most part need of goads, while others are pressed down by afflictions,
   or labor under weakness, he adds to doctrine, exhortation and
   consolation It appears from this passage, and from what goes before,
   that prophecy does not mean the gift of foretelling future events: but
   as I have said this once before, I do not repeat it.

   4. He that speaketh in another tongue, edifieth himself. In place of
   what he had said before -- that he speaketh unto God, he now says -- he
   speaketh to himself But whatever is done in the Church, ought to be for
   the common benefit. Away, then, with that misdirected ambition, which
   gives occasion for the advantage of the people generally being
   hindered! Besides, Paul speaks by way of concession: for when ambition
   makes use of such empty vauntings, [811] there is inwardly no desire of
   doing good; but Paul does, in effect, order away from the common
   society of believers those men of mere show, who look only to
   themselves.

   5. I would that ye all spake with tongues Again he declares that he
   does not give such a preference to prophecy, as not to leave some place
   for foreign tongues. This must be carefully observed. For God has
   conferred nothing upon his Church in vain, and languages were of some
   benefit. [812] Hence, although the Corinthians, by a misdirected
   eagerness for show, had rendered that gift partly useless and
   worthless, and partly even injurious, yet Paul, nevertheless, commends
   the use of tongues. So far is he from wishing them abolished or thrown
   away. At the present day, while a knowledge of languages is more than
   simply necessary, and while God has at this time, in his wonderful
   kindness, brought them forward from darkness into light, there are at
   present great theologians, who declaim against them with furious zeal.
   As it is certain, that the Holy Spirit has here honored the use of
   tongues with never-dying praise, we may very readily gather, what is
   the kind of spirit that actuates those reformers, [813] who level as
   many reproaches as they can against the pursuit of them. At the same
   time the cases are very different. For Paul takes in languages of any
   sort -- such as served merely for the publication of the gospel among
   all nations. They, on the other hand, condemn those languages, from
   which, as fountains, the pure truth of scripture is to be drawn. An
   exception is added -- that we must not be so taken up with the use of
   languages, as to treat with neglect prophecy, which ought to have the
   first place.

   Unless he interpret. For if interpretation is added, there will then be
   prophecy. You must not, however, understand Paul to give liberty here
   to any one to take up the time of the Church to no profit by muttering
   words in a foreign tongue. For how ridiculous it were, to repeat the
   same thing in a variety of languages without any necessity! But it
   often happens, that the use of a foreign tongue is seasonable. In
   short, let us simply have an eye to this as our end -- that edification
   may redound to the Church.

   6. Now, brethren, if I should come. He proposes himself as an example,
   because in his person the case was exhibited more strikingly [814] The
   Corinthians experienced in themselves abundant fruit from his doctrine.
   He asks them, then, of what advantage it would be to them, if he were
   to make use of foreign languages among them. He shows them by this
   instance, how much better it were to apply their minds to prophesyings.
   Besides, it was less invidious to reprove this vice in his own person,
   than in that of another.

   He mentions, however, four different kinds of edification --
   revelation, knowledge, prophesying, and doctrine As there are a variety
   of opinions among interpreters respecting them, let me be permitted,
   also, to bring forward my conjecture. As, however, it is but a
   conjecture, I leave my readers to judge of it. Revelation and
   prophesying I put in one class, and I am of opinion that the latter is
   the administration of the former. I am of the same opinion as to
   knowledge and doctrine What, therefore, any one has obtained by
   revelation, he dispenses by prophesying. Doctrine is the way of
   communicating knowledge. Thus a Prophet will be -- one who interprets
   and administers revelation. This is rather in favor of the definition
   that I have given above, than at variance with it. For we have said
   that prophesying does not consist of a simple and bare interpretation
   of Scripture, but includes also knowledge for applying it to present
   use -- which is obtained only by revelation, and the special
   inspiration of God.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [806] "The word diokete," says Doddridge, "properly signifies -- to
   pursue with an eagerness like that with which hunters follow their game
   And it may be intended to intimate, how hard it is to obtain and
   preserve such a truly benevolent spirit in the main series of life;
   considering, on the one hand, how many provocations we are like to meet
   with, and on the other, the force of self-love, which will in so many
   instances be ready to break in upon it." -- Ed

   [807] "C'estoit ceste voye et vertu excellente;" -- "This was that
   distinguished way and excellence."

   [808] It is remarked by Granville Penn, that "the context shows that
   the Apostle means, a language foreign to that of the auditors, and,
   therefore, not known to them" -- as "we learn from verse 21 that we are
   to supply hetera -- other,' not agnostHu -- unknown.' We have," he
   adds, "had lamentable proof of the abuse to which the latter
   injudicious rendering can be perverted in the hands of ignorant or
   insidious enthusiasm, by assuming the term to mean, a tongue unknown to
   all mankind;' and from thence, by an impious inference, supernatural
   and divine; instead of relatively, unknown to another people.' And yet,
   after all, unknown' is not the Apostle's word, but only an Italic
   supplement suggested by the English revisers of the seventeenth
   century." -- Ed

   [809] "Comme on dit en prouerbe -- I1 presche a soy-mesme et aux
   murailles;" -- "As they say proverbially -- He preaches to himself and
   the bare walls." The proverb, "Sibi canit et Musis" -- ("He sings to
   himself and the Muses,") is believed to have originated in a saying of
   Antigenides, a celebrated musician of Thebes, who, when his scholar
   Ismenias sung with good taste, but not so as to gain the applause of
   the people, exclaimed -- "Mihi cane et Musis;" -- ("Sing to me and the
   Muses") -- meaning that it was enough, if he pleased good judges. --
   Ed.

   [810] A pleonasm is a figure of speech -- involving a redundancy of
   expression. -- Ed.

   [811] "Iettent ainsi de grandes bouffees et se brauent en leur parler;"
   -- "Make use in this way of great puffings, and boast themselves in
   their talk."

   [812] "Les langues aidoyent lors aucunement a l'auancement des
   Eglises;" -- "Languages, at that time, were of some help for the
   advancement of the Churches."

   [813] "Ces gentils reformateurs;" -- "Those pretty reformers."

   [814] "Estoit plus propre pour leur imprimer ce qu'il dit;" -- "Was the
   more calculated to impress upon them what he says."
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 14:7-17

   7. And even things without life giving sound, whether pipe or harp,
   except they give a distinction in the sounds, how shall it be known
   what is piped or harped?

   7. Quin et inanimia vocem reddentia, sive tibia, sive cithara, nisi
   distinctionem sonis dederint: quomodo cognoscetur, quod tibia canitur
   aut cithara?

   8. For if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare
   himself to the battle?

   8. Etenim si incertam vocem tuba dederit, quis apparabitur ad bellum?

   9. So likewise ye, except ye utter by the tongue words easy to be
   understood, how shall it be known what is spoken? for ye shall speak
   into the air.

   9. Sic et vos per linguam, nisi significantem sermonem dederitis:
   quomodo intelligetur quod dicitur? eritis enim in aerem loquentes.

   10. There are, it may be, so many kinds of voices in the world, and
   none of them is without signification.

   10. Tam multa, verbi gratia, genera vocum sunt in mundo, et nihil horum
   mutum.

   11. Therefore if I know not the meaning of the voice, I shall be unto
   him that speaketh a barbarian, and he that speaketh shall be a
   barbarian unto me.

   11. Itaque si nesciero vim voeis, ero ei qui loquitur, barbarus: et qui
   loquitur, apud me barbarus.

   12. Even so ye, forasmuch as ye are zealous of spiritual gifts, seek
   that ye may excel to the edifying of the church.

   12. Itaque et vos, quandoquidem sectatores estis spirituum, ad
   aedificationera Ecclesiae quaeerite, ut excellatis.

   13. Wherefore let him that speaketh in an unknown tongue pray that he
   may interpret.

   13. Quapropter qui loquitur lingua, oret ut interpretetur.

   14. For if I pray in an unknown tongue, my spirit prayeth, but my
   understanding is unfruitful.

   14. Nam si orem lingua, spiritus meus orat, mens autem mea fructu
   caret.

   15. What is it then? I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with
   the understanding also: I will sing with the spirit, and I will sing
   with the understanding also.

   15. Quid igitur est? orabo spiritu, sed orabo et mente: canam spiritu,
   sed canam et mente.

   16. Else when thou shalt bless with the spirit, how shall he that
   occupieth the room of the unlearned say Amen at thy giving of thanks,
   seeing he understandeth not what thou sayest?

   16. Alioqui si benedixeris spiritu, is qui implet locum idiotae,
   quomodo dicturus est Amen ad tuam gratiarum actionem? quandoquidem quid
   dicas, nescit.

   17. For thou verily givest thanks well, but the other is not edified.

   17. Nam tu quidem bene gratias agis, sed alius non aedificatur.


   7. Nay even things without life. He brings forward similitudes, first
   from musical instruments, and then afterwards from the nature of things
   generally, there being no voice that has not some peculiarity, suitable
   for distinction. [815] "Even things without life," says he, "instruct
   us." There are, it is true, many random sounds or crashes, without any
   modulation, [816] but Paul speaks here of voices in which there is
   something of art, as though he had said -- "A man cannot give life to a
   harp or flute, but he makes it give forth a sound that is regulated in
   such a manner, that it can be distinguished. How absurd then it is,
   that even men, endowed with intelligence, should utter a confused,
   indistinguishable sound!"

   We must not, however, enter here upon any minute discussion as to
   musical harmonies, inasmuch as Paul has merely taken what is commonly
   understood; as, for example, the sound of the trumpet, [817] of which
   he speaks shortly afterwards; for it is so much calculated to raise the
   spirits, that it rouses up -- not only men, but even horses. Hence it
   is related in historical records, that the Lacedemonians, when joining
   battle, preferred the use of the flute, [818] lest the army should, at
   the first charge, rush forward upon the enemy with too keen an onset.
   [819] In fine, we all know by experience what power music has in
   exciting men's feelings, so that Plato affirms, and not without good
   reason, that music has very much effect in influencing, in one way or
   another, the manners of a state. To speak into the air is to beat the
   air (1 Corinthians 9:26) to no purpose. "Thy voice will not reach
   either God or man, but will vanish into air."

   10. None of them dumb [820] He now speaks in a more general way, for he
   now takes in the natural voices of animals. He uses the term dumb here,
   to mean confused -- as opposed to an articulate voice; for the barking
   of dogs differs from the neighing of horses, and the roaring of lions
   from the braying of asses. Every kind of bird, too, has its own
   particular way of singing and chirping. The whole order of nature,
   therefore, as appointed by God, invites us to observe a distinction.
   [821]

   11. I shall be to him that speaketh a barbarian [822] The tongue ought
   to be an index of the mind -- not merely in the sense of the proverb,
   but in the sense that is explained by Aristotle in the commencement of
   his book -- "On Interpretation." [823] How foolish then it is and
   preposterous in a man, to utter in an assembly a voice of which the
   hearer understands nothing -- in which he perceives no token from which
   he may learn what the person means! It is not without good reason,
   therefore, that Paul views it as the height of absurdity, that a man
   should be a barbarian to the hearers, by chattering in an unknown
   tongue, and at the same time he elegantly treats with derision the
   foolish ambition of the Corinthians, who were eager to obtain praise
   and fame by this means. "This reward," says he, "you will earn -- that
   you will be a barbarian." For the term barbarian, whether it be an
   artificial one, (as Strabo thinks, [824] ) or derived from some other
   origin, is taken in a bad sense. Hence the Greeks, who looked upon
   themselves as the only persons who were good speakers, and had a
   polished language, gave to all others the name of barbarians, from
   their rude and rustic dialect. No language, however, is so cultivated
   as not to be reckoned barbarous, when it is not understood. "He that
   heareth," says Paul, "will be unto me a barbarian, and I will be so to
   him in return." By these words he intimates, that to speak in an
   unknown tongue, is not to hold fellowship with the Church, but rather
   to keep aloof from it, and that he who will act this part, will be
   deservedly despised by others, because he first despises them.

   12. Since you are in pursuit of spiritual gifts Paul concludes that the
   gift of tongues has not been conferred with the view of giving occasion
   of boasting to a few, without yielding advantage to the Church. "If
   spiritual gifts," says he, "delight you, let the end be edification.
   Then only may you reckon, that you have attained an excellence that is
   true and praiseworthy -- when the Church receives advantage from you.
   Paul, however, does not hereby give permission to any one to cherish an
   ambition to excel, even to the benefit of the Church, but by correcting
   the fault, he shows how far short they come of what they are in pursuit
   of, and at the same time lets them know who they are that should be
   most highly esteemed. He would have a man to be held in higher
   estimation, in proportion as he devotes himself with eagerness to
   promote edification. In the meantime, it is our part to have this one
   object in view -- that the Lord may be exalted, and that his kingdom
   may be, from day to day, enlarged.

   The term spirits, [825] he employs here, by metonymy, to denote
   spiritual gifts, as the spirit of doctrine, or of understanding, or of
   judgment, is employed to denote spiritual doctrine, or understanding,
   or judgment. Otherwise we must keep in view what he stated previously,
   that it is one and the same Spirit, who distributeth to every man
   various gifts according to his will. (1 Corinthians 12:11.)

   13. Wherefore let him that speaketh in another tongue This is an
   anticipation, by way of reply to a question which might very readily be
   proposed to him. "If any one, therefore, is able to speak a foreign
   language, will the gift be useless? Why should that be kept back, which
   might be brought out to light, to the glory of God?" He shows the
   remedy. "Let him," says he, "ask from God the gift of interpretation
   also. If he is without this, let him abstain in the meantime from
   ostentation." [826]

   14. For if I pray in another tongue. [827] While this example, too,
   serves to confirm what he has previously maintained, it forms, at the
   same time, in my opinion, an additional particular. For it is probable
   that the Corinthians had been in fault in this respect also, that, as
   they discoursed, so they also prayed in foreign tongues. At the same
   time, both abuses took their rise from the same source, as indeed they
   were comprehended under one class. What is meant by praying in a
   tongue, [828] appears from what goes before -- to frame a prayer in a
   foreign language.

   The meaning of the term spirit, however, is not so easily explained.
   The idea of Ambrose, who refers it to the Spirit that we receive in
   baptism, has not only no foundation, but has not even the appearance of
   it. Augustine takes it in a more refined way, as denoting that
   apprehension, which conceives ideas and signs of things, so that it is
   a faculty of the soul that is inferior to the understanding. There is
   more plausibility in the opinion of those who interpret it as meaning
   the breathing of the throat -- that is, the breath. This
   interpretation, however, does not accord with the meaning which the
   term invariably bears in Paul's discussion in this place: nay more, it
   appears to have been repeated the oftener by way of concession. For
   they gloried in that honorary distinction, which Paul, it is true,
   allows them, while, on the other hand, he shows how preposterous it is
   to abuse [829] a thing that is good and excellent. It is as though he
   had said -- "Thou makest thy boast to me of spirit, but to what
   purpose, if it is useless?" From this consideration, I am led to agree
   with Chrysostom, as to the meaning of this term, who explains it, as in
   the previous instance, (1 Corinthians 14:12,) to mean a spiritual gift.
   Thus my spirit will mean -- the gift conferred upon me. [830]

   But here a new question arises; for it is not credible (at least we
   nowhere read of it) that any spoke under the influence of the Spirit in
   a language that was to themselves unknown. For the gift of tongues was
   conferred -- not for the mere purpose of uttering a sound, but, on the
   contrary, with the view of making a communication. For how ridiculous a
   thing it would be, that the tongue of a Roman should be framed by the
   Spirit of God to pronounce Greek words, which were altogether unknown
   to the speaker, as parrots, magpies, and crows, are taught to mimic
   human voices! If, on the other hand, the man who was endowed with the
   gift of tongues, did not speak without sense and understanding, Paul
   would have had no occasion to say, that the spirit prays, but the
   understanding is unfruitful, for the understanding must have been
   conjoined with the spirit

   I answer, that Paul here, for the sake of illustration, makes a
   supposition, that had no reality, in this way: "If the gift of tongues
   be disjoined from the understanding, so that he who speaks is a
   barbarian to himself, as well as to others, what good would he do by
   babbling in this manner?" For it does not, appear that the mind is here
   said to be unfruitful, (akarpon) on the ground of no advantage accruing
   to the Church, inasmuch as Paul is here speaking of the private prayers
   of an individual. Let us therefore keep it in view, that things that
   are connected with each other are here disjoined for the sake of
   illustration -- not on the ground that it either can, or usually does,
   so happen. The meaning is now obvious. "If, therefore, I frame prayers
   in a language that is not understood by me, and the spirit supplies me
   with words, the spirit indeed itself, which regulates my tongue, will
   in that case pray, but my mind will either be wandering somewhere else,
   or at least will have no part in the prayer."

   Let us take notice, that Paul reckons it a great fault if the mind is
   not occupied in prayer. And no wonder; for what else do we in prayer,
   but pour out our thoughts and desires before God? Farther, as prayer is
   the spiritual worship of God, what is more at variance with the nature
   of it, than that it should proceed merely from the lips, and not from
   the inmost soul? And these things must have been perfectly familiar to
   every mind, had not the devil besotted the world to such a degree, as
   to make men believe that they pray aright, when they merely make their
   lips move. So obstinate, too, are Papists in their madness, that they
   do not merely justify the making of prayers without understanding, but
   even prefer that the unlearned should mutter in unknown mumblings.
   [831] Meanwhile they mock God by an acute sophism [832] -- that the
   final intention is enough, or, in other words, that it is an acceptable
   service to God, if a Spaniard curses God in the German language, while
   in his mind he is tossed with various profane cares, provided only he
   shall, by setting himself to his form of prayer, make up matters with
   God by means of a thought that quickly vanishes. [833]

   15. I will pray with the spirit Lest any one should ask, by way of
   objection, "Will the spirit then be useless in prayer?" he teaches,
   that it is lawful, indeed, to pray with the spirit, provided the mind
   be at the same time employed, that is, the understanding He allows,
   therefore, and sanctions the use of a spiritual gift in prayer, but
   requires, what is the main thing, that the mind be not unemployed.
   [834]

   When he says, I will sing Psalms, or, I will sing, he makes use of a
   particular instance, instead of a general statement. For, as the
   praises of God were the subject-matter of the Psalms, he means by the
   singing of Psalms [835] -- blessing God, or rendering thanks to him,
   for in our supplications, we either ask something from God, or we
   acknowledge some blessing that has been conferred upon us. From this
   passage, however, we at the same time infer, that the custom of singing
   was, even at that time, in use among believers, as appears, also, from
   Pliny, who, writing at least forty years, or thereabouts, after the
   death of Paul, mentions, that the Christians were accustomed to sing
   Psalms to Christ before day-break. [836] I have also no doubt, that,
   from the very first, they followed the custom of the Jewish Church in
   singing Psalms.

   16 Else, if thou wilt bless with the spirit. Hitherto he has been
   showing, that the prayers of every one of us will be vain and
   unfruitful, if the understanding does not go along with the voice. He
   now comes to speak of public prayers also. "If he that frames or utters
   forth prayers in the name of the people is not understood by the
   assembly, how will the common people add an expression of their desires
   in the close, so as to take part in them? For there is no fellowship in
   prayer, unless when all with one mind unite in the same desires. The
   same remark applies to blessing, or giving thanks to God."

   Paul's expression, however, intimates, [837] that some one of the
   ministers uttered or pronounced prayers in a distinct voice, and that
   the whole assembly followed in their minds the words of that one
   person, until he had come to a close, and then they all said Amen -- to
   intimate, that the prayer offered up by that one person was that of all
   of them in common. [838] It is known, that Amen is a Hebrew word,
   derived from the same term from which comes the word that signifies
   faithfulness or truth. [839] It is, accordingly, a token of
   confirmation, [840] both in alarming, and in desiring. [841] Farther,
   as the word was, from long use, familiar among the Jews, it made its
   way from them to the Gentiles, and the Greeks made use of it as if it
   had belonged originally to their own language. Hence it came to be a
   term in common use among all nations. Now Paul says -- "If in public
   prayer thou makest use of a foreign tongue, that is not understood by
   the unlearned and the common people among whom thou speakest, there
   will be no fellowship, and thy prayer or blessing will be no longer a
   public one." "Why?" "No one," says he, "can add his Amen to thy prayer
   or psalm, if he does not understand it."

   Papists, on the other hand, reckon that to be a sacred and legitimate
   observance, which Paul so decidedly rejects. In this they discover an
   amazing impudence. Nay more, this is a clear token from which we learn
   how grievously, and with what unbridled liberty, Satan rages in the
   dogmas of Popery. [842] For what can be clearer than those words of
   Paul -- than an unlearned person cannot take any part in public prayer
   if he does not understand what is said? What can be plainer than this
   prohibition -- "let not prayers or thanksgivings be offered up in
   public, except in the vernacular tongue." In doing every day, what Paul
   says should not, or even cannot, be done, do they not reckon him to be
   illiterate? In observing with the utmost strictness what he forbids, do
   they not deliberately contemn God? We see, then, how Satan sports among
   them with impunity. Their diabolical obstinacy shows itself in this --
   that, when admonished, they are so far from repenting, that they defend
   this gross abuse by fire and sword.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [815] "C'est a dire, pour signifier quelque chose;" -- "That is to say,
   for signifying something."

   [816] "Sans mesure ou distinction;" -- "Without measure or
   distinction."

   [817] "It is well known that trumpets were exclusively employed in
   almost all ancient armies, for the purpose of directing the movements
   of the soldiers, and of informing them what they were to do -- as when
   to attack, advance, or retreat. This was the custom in even the most
   early Jewish armies, as the Law directed two silver trumpets to be made
   for the purpose. (Numbers 10:1, 2, 9.) Of course, a distinction of
   tones was necessary, to express the various intimations which were in
   this manner conveyed; and if the trumpeter did not give the proper
   intonation, the soldiers could not tell how to act, or were in danger,
   from misconception, of acting wrongly." Illustrated Commentary. -- Ed.

   [818] "Ils vsoyent plustost de fluste, que de trompette;" -- "They used
   the flute, rather than the trumpet."

   [819] The use of the flute on such occasions by the Lacedemonians, is
   supposed by Valerius Maximus to have "been intended to raise the
   courage of the soldiers, that they might begin the onset with greater
   violence and fury;" but the reason stated by Calvin accords with the
   account given of it by Thucydides (with whom the rest of the ancient
   historians agree) -- that it was designed to "render them cool and
   sedate -- trumpets and other instruments being more proper to inspire
   with heat and rage;" which passions they thought were "fitted rather to
   beget disorder and confusion, than to produce any noble and memorable
   actions -- valor not being the effect of a sudden and vanishing
   transport, but proceeding from a settled and habitual firmness and
   constancy of mind." Potter's Gr. Ant. volume 2. -- Ed.

   [820] "That in this passage," says Dr. Henderson, "phone, which
   properly signifies sound, then voice, must be taken in the sense of
   language or dialect, is evident: for it would not be true, that there
   are no sounds or voices in the world (aphonon) without signification,
   according as these terms are usually understood. The meaning is --
   every language is intelligible to some nation or other; and it is only
   to persons who are ignorant of it, that its words are destitute of
   signification. This the Apostle illustrates in a very forcible manner:
   Therefore, if I know not the, meaning of the voice, (tos phonos, of the
   language,) I shall be to him that speaketh a barbarian, and he that
   speaketh shall be a barbarian unto me.' We shall be like two
   foreigners, who do not understand each other's tongue. The very use of
   the term interpret and interpretation, as applied to this subject, also
   proves that he could only have intelligent language in view: it being a
   contradiction in terms to speak of interpreting that which has no
   meaning." Henderson on Inspiration. -- Ed

   [821] "C'est a dire, nous monstre aucunement qu'il faut parler en sorte
   que nous soyons entendus;" -- "That is to say, it shows us, in a
   manner, that we must speak so as to be understood."

   [822] "The Greeks, after the custom of the Egyptians, mentioned by;
   Herodotus, (lib. 2,) called all those barbarians who did not speak
   their language. In process of time, however, the Romans having subdued
   the Greeks, delivered themselves by the force of arms from that
   opprobrious appellation; and joined the Greeks in calling all
   barbarians who did not speak either the Greek or the Latin language.
   Afterwards, barbarian signified any one who spoke a language which
   another did not understand. Thus the Scythian philosopher, Anacharsis,
   said, that among the Athenians the Scythians were barbarians; and among
   the Scythians the Athenians were barbarians. In like manner Ovid.
   Trist. 5. 10, Barbarus hic ego sum, quia non intelligor ulli;' -- I am
   a barbarian here, because I am not understood by any one.' This is the
   sense which the Apostle affixes to the word barbarian, in the present
   passage. McKnight. -- Ed.

   [823] "La langue doit estre comme vn image, pour expimer et representer
   ce qui est en l'entendement;" -- "The tongue should be like an image,
   to express and represent what is in the understanding."

   [824] He considers the term barbaros, (barbarian,) to be a term
   constructed in imitation of the sense -- to convey the idea of one that
   speaks with difficulty and harshness. See Strabo, Book 14. Bloomfield
   considers the term barbarian to be derived -- "not" as some think,
   "from the Arabic berber, to murmur, but from the Punic berber, a
   shepherd -- having been originally appropriated to the indigenous and
   pastoral inhabitants of Africa; who, to their more civilized fellow-men
   on the other side of the Mediterranean, appeared rustics and
   barbarians. Hence the term barbaros came at length to mean a rustic or
   clown." -- Ed

   [825] "Les dons spirituels, il y a mot a mot, les esprits;" --
   "Spiritual gifts -- it is literally, spirits."

   [826] "De parler a ostentation;" -- "From speaking for ostentation's
   sake."

   [827] "What is it," says Witsius, (in his "Sacred Dissertations,") "to
   pray with the tongue? with the spirit? with the mind? (1 Corinthians
   14:14, 15.) The tongue means here a language unknown to others, and
   employed by one who is endowed with a supernatural gift of the Holy
   Spirit. To pray with the tongue, is to pray in a language unknown to
   others; as, for instance, to pray in the Hebrew language in presence of
   Greeks. In that sense he had said, (1 Corinthians 14:2,) He that
   speaketh with the tongue, speaketh not unto men, but unto God; for no
   man understandeth him;' that is, he who speaks in a foreign tongue, the
   knowledge of which he has acquired by an extraordinary gift of the
   Spirit, has God only for a witness. He cannot reckon as his witnesses,
   or as persons aware of what he is doing, those who are ignorant of the
   language, and to whose edification he has contributed little or
   nothing. The spirit means here that extraordinary gift, by which a man
   is led to act in a certain way, accompanied by almost ecstatic
   emotions, so that sometimes he is neither aware what he says, nor do
   others understand what he means. To pray with the Spirit, is to pray in
   such a manner as to show that you feel the presence of an extraordinary
   gift of the Spirit, which moves and hurries you along, in a powerful
   manner, to those actions which excite astonishment. Nous, intelligence,
   mind, seems here to be chiefly used in a transitive sense, to mean what
   we give another to understand. Such is the meaning of, tvvnh, to which
   nous corresponds. cht 'znk ltvvnty, incline thine ear to my
   understanding, that is, to those things which I shall give thee to
   understand. (Proverbs 5:1.) To pray with the mind, is to pray in such a
   manner that the prayers which you deliberately conceive, may be
   conceived and understood by others. Paul, accordingly, proposes himself
   as an example of the proper manner of conducting prayers. If I pray in
   a tongue unknown to the assembly in whose presence I pray, but which I
   have learned by Divine inspiration, my spirit prayeth, I am acting
   under the influence of that gift, which impels and arouses me to
   unusual and remarkable proceedings; but my understanding is unfruitful,
   I do not enable another to understand with advantage the conceptions of
   my mind. What then? I will pray with the Spirit; when the vehement
   emotion of the Spirit comes upon me, I will not struggle against it,
   but I will pray with the understanding also; I will show that I am not
   mad, but possessed of a sound understanding; and I will endeavor that
   others, as well as myself, be edified by my prayer." Biblical Cabinet,
   volume 24. -- Ed

   [828] "Que c'est que prier de langue, (car il y a ainsi mot a mot, la
   ou nous traduisons Prier en langage incognu);" -- "What it is to pray
   in a tongue, for such is the literal meaning, where we render it -- to
   pray in an unknown language." Wilclif (1380) gives the literal
   rendering -- For if I preie in tunge. Tyndale, (1534,) If I pray with
   tonges. Cranmer, (1539,) For if I praye with tongue. Rheims, (1582,)
   For if I pray with the tongue. -- Ed.

   [829] "Quel danger il y a, quand on abuse;" -- "What danger there is,
   when one abuses."

   [830] "What the Apostle means by to pneuma mou, (my spirit,) is,
   neither the Holy Spirit moving him to speak, nor any spiritual
   endowment with which he was gifted, but, as the phrase signifies in
   other passages in which it occurs, (Romans 1:9; 1 Corinthians 5:3; 2
   Timothy 4:22; Philemon 25,) his own mind, with which he engaged in the
   service. By nous, as contrasted with this, it is manifest he cannot
   mean his faculty of understanding -- for it is comprehended under the
   former. The word must, therefore, signify the meaning or sense which he
   attached to the language he employed -- an acceptation in which he uses
   the term, ver. 19. So far as he himself was concerned, he derived
   benefit -- connecting, as he did, intelligent ideas with the words to
   which he gave utterance; but the meaning of what he uttered (akarpos)
   produced no fruit in the hearers, inasmuch as they did not understand
   him. It must be observed, however, that the Apostle is here only
   supposing a case, such as that which frequently presented itself in the
   Church at Corinth; not that he would have it to be believed that it
   ever occurred in his own experience. On the contrary, he avers that,
   whenever he engaged either in prayer or praise, it was in a way that
   was intelligible, and consequently profitable both to himself and
   others, to pneumati, -- to noi, with the spirit -- with the
   understanding." Henderson on Inspiration. -- Ed

   [831] "Mais qui plus est, aiment mieux que les idiots et ignorans
   barbotent des patinostres en langage qui leur est incognu;" -- "But,
   what is more, they like better that unlearned and ignorant persons
   should mutter over paternosters in a language which they do not
   understand."

   [832] "Ils ont vne solution bien aigue et peremptoire;" -- "They have a
   very acute and peremptory solution."

   [833] "Vne pensee esuanouissante en l'air, qu'ils appellent Intention
   finale;" -- "A thought vanishing into air, which they call final
   Intention."

   [834] "Que ne soit point sans intelligence;" -- "That it be not without
   understanding."

   [835] The original word is psalo -- I will sing Psalms It is the same
   verb that is made use of by James, (James 5:13,) euthumei tis; psalleto
   -- Is any one cheerful: let him sing Psalms. -- Ed

   [836] Pliny's letter, referred to by Calvin, (written A.D. 107,) is
   given at full length (as translated by Dr. Lardner) in Horne's
   Introduction, volume 1. -- Ed.

   [837] "Signifie et presuppose;" -- "Intimates and presupposes."

   [838] "Amen,' or So be it,' was, among the Jews, used by the
   congregation at the end of a prayer or blessing, to denote their assent
   to, or appropriation of, that which one person had pronounced. Many
   instances of this practice occur in the Old Testament. From the Jewish
   Synagogue this, with many other customs of worship, passed to the
   Christian Church, in which it is still generally retained. Justin
   Martyr particularly notices the unanimous and loud Amen' at the
   conclusion of the Lord's Supper, observing, that when the minister had
   finished the prayer and the thanksgiving, all the people present, with
   a joyful exclamation, said Amen.' -- (Apol. volume 2.)" llustrated
   Commentary. -- Ed.

   [839] The word to which Calvin. refers is 'mn, (Amen) truth The term
   occurs in Isaiah 65:16, 'lchy 'mn, (Elohe Amen,) the God of truth

   [840] "Confirmation et approbation;" -- "Confirmation and approbation."

   [841] "Amen," says Witsius, in his Dissertations on the Lord's Prayer,
   "is a Hebrew particle, expressive both of strong affection and of
   ardent desire. Luther, with his wonted liveliness of manner, wrote to
   Melancthon in the following terms: -- I pray for you, I have prayed,
   and I will pray, and I have no doubt I shall be heard, for I feel the
   Amen in my heart.'" -- Biblical Cabinet, volume 24. -- Ed.

   [842] "Par lequel nous voyons comment Satan a tenu ses rangs, et domine
   en la Papaute furieusement, et d'une license merueilleusement
   desbordee;" -- "From which we see how Satan has maintained his place,
   and has ruled in Popery with fury, and with a liberty amazingly
   reckless."
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 14:18-25

   18. I thank my God, I speak with tongues more than ye all:

   18. Gratias ago Deo meo, quod magis quam vos omnes linguis loquor:

   19. Yet in the church I had rather speak five words with my
   understanding, that by my voice I might teach others also, than ten
   thousand words in an unknown tongue.

   19. Sed in Ecclesia volo quinque verba mente mea loqui, ut et alios
   instituam, potius quam decem millia verborum, lingua.

   20. Brethren, be not children in understanding: howbeit in malice be ye
   children, but in understanding be men.

   20. Fratres, ne sitis pueri sensibus, sed malitia pueri sitis: sensibus
   vero sitis perfecti.

   21. In the law it is written, With men of other tongues and other lips
   will I speak unto this people; and yet for all that will they not hear
   me, saith the Lord.

   21. In lege scriptum est: (Ies. 28:11,12;) Alienis linguis et labiis
   alienis loquar populo huic: et ne sic quidem audient me, dicit Dominus.

   22. Wherefore tongues are for a sign, not to them that believe, but to
   them that believe not: but prophesying serveth not for them that
   believe not, but for them which believe.

   22. Itaque linguae signi vice sunt, non iis qui credunt, sed
   ineredulis: contra prophetia non incredulis, sed s credentibus.

   23. If therefore the whole church be come together into one place, and
   all speak with tongues, and there come in those that are unlearned, or
   unbelievers, will they not say that ye are mad?

   23. Ergo si convenerit Ecclesia tota simul, et omnes linguis loquantur,
   ingrediantur autem indocti aut increduli, nonne dicent vos insanire?

   24. But if all prophesy, and there come in one that believeth not, or
   one unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is judged of all:

   24. Quodsi omnes prophetent, ingrediatur autem ineredulus aut indoctus,
   coarguitur ab omnibus, diiudieatur ab omnibus,

   25. And thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest; and so falling
   down on his face he will worship God, and report that God is in you of
   a truth.

   25. Et sic occulta cordis eius manifesta fiunt; atque ita procidens in
   faciem, adorabit Deum, renuntians, quod Deus revera in vobis sit.


   18. I thank, etc. As there are many that detract from another's
   excellencies, in which they cannot themselves have distinction, Paul,
   that he might not seem to depreciate, through malignity or envy, the
   gift of tongues, anticipates that suspicion, by showing that he is, in
   this respect, superior to them all. "See," says he, "how little
   occasion you have to suspect the design of my discourse, as if I
   depreciated what I myself lacked; for if we were to contend as to
   tongues, there is not one of you that could bear comparison with me.
   While, however, I might display myself to advantage in this
   department., I am more concerned for edification." Paul's doctrine
   derives no small weight from the circumstance, that he has not an eye
   to himself. Lest, however, he should appear excessively arrogant, in
   preferring himself before all others, he ascribes it all to God. Thus
   he tempers his boasting with modesty.

   19. I would rather speak five words. This is spoken hyperbolically,
   unless you understand five words, as meaning five sentences. Now as
   Paul, who might otherwise have exulted loftily in his power of speaking
   with tongues, voluntarily abstains from it, and, without any show, aims
   at edification exclusively, he reproves, by this means, the empty
   ambition of those, that are eagerly desirous to show themselves off
   with empty tinkling. (1 Corinthians 13:1.) The authority of the Apostle
   ought, also, to have no little weight in drawing them off from vanity
   of this kind.

   20. Brethren, be not children in understanding He proceeds a step
   farther; for he shows that the Corinthians are so infatuated, that
   they, of their own accord. draw down upon themselves, and eagerly
   desire, as though it were a singular benefit, what the Lord threatens
   that he will send, when he designs to inflict upon his people the
   severest punishment. What dreadful madness is this -- to pursue eagerly
   with their whole desire, what, in the sight of God, is regarded as a
   curse! That we may, however, understand more accurately Paul's meaning,
   we must, observe, that this statement is grounded on the testimony of
   Isaiah, which he immediately afterwards subjoins. (Isaiah 28:11, 12.)
   And as interpreters have been misled, from not observing the connection
   to be of this nature, to prevent all mistake, we shall first explain
   the passage in Isaiah, and then we shall come to Paul's words.

   In that chapter the Prophet, inveighs with severity against the ten
   tribes, which had abandoned themselves to every kind of wickedness. The
   only consolation is, that God had still a people uncorrupted in the
   tribe of Judah; but straightway he deplores the corruption of that
   tribe also; and he does so the more sharply, because there was no hope
   of amendment. For thus he speaks in the name of God -- Whom shall I
   teach knowledge? those that are weaned from their mother? those that
   are drawn from the breasts By this he means, that they are no more
   capable of instruction than little children but lately weaned.

   It is added -- Precept upon precept, instruction upon instruction,
   charge upon charge, direction upon direction, here a little, and there
   a little In these words he expresses, in the style of a mimic, [843]
   the slowness and carelessness by which they were kept back. "In
   teaching them, I lose my labor, for they make no progress, because they
   are beyond measure uncultivated, and what they had been taught by means
   of long-continued labor, they in a single moment forget."

   It is added still farther -- He that speaketh to that people is like
   one that maketh use of stammering lips, and a foreign language This is
   the passage that Paul quotes. Now the meaning is, [844] that the people
   have been visited with such blindness and madness, that they no more
   understand God when speaking to them, than they would some barbarian or
   foreigner, stammering in an unknown tongue -- which is a dreadful
   curse. He has not, however, quoted the Prophet's words with exactness,
   because he reckoned it enough to make a pointed reference to the
   passage, that the Corinthians, on being admonished, might attentively
   consider it. As to his saying that it was written in the law, [845]
   this is not at variance with common usage; for the Prophets had not a
   ministry distinct from the law, but were the interpreters of the law,
   and their doctrine is, as it were, a sort of appendage to it; hence the
   law included the whole body of Scripture, up to the advent of Christ.
   Now Paul from this infers as follows -- "Brethren, it is necessary to
   guard against that childishness, which is so severely reproved by the
   Prophet -- that the word of God sounds in your ears without any fruit.
   Now, when you reject prophecy, which is placed within your reach, and
   prefer to stand amazed at empty sound, is not this voluntarily to incur
   the curse of God? [846]

   Farther, lest the Corinthians should say in reply, that to be
   spiritually children, is elsewhere commended, (Matthew 18:4,) Paul
   anticipates this objection, and exhorts them, indeed, to be children in
   malice, but to beware of being children in understanding Hence we infer
   how shameless a part those act, who make Christian simplicity consist
   in ignorance. Paul would have all believers to be, as far as possible,
   in full maturity as to understanding The Pope, inasmuch as it is easier
   to govern asses than men, gives orders, under pretext of simplicity,
   that all under him shall remain uninstructed. [847] Let us from this
   draw a comparison between the dominion of Popery, and the institution
   of Christ, and see how far they agree. [848]

   22. Therefore tongues are for a sign This passage may be explained in
   two ways, by considering the word therefore as referring merely to the
   preceding sentence, or as having a bearing generally on the whole of
   the foregoing discussion. If it is a particular inference, the meaning
   will be -- "You see, brethren, that what you so eagerly desire is not a
   blessing bestowed by God upon believers, but a punishment, by which he
   inflicts vengeance upon unbelievers." In this way, Paul would not be
   viewed as taking in the use of tongues under all circumstances, but
   simply as touching upon what had in one instance occurred. Should any
   one, however, prefer to extend it to the whole discussion, I have no
   objection, though I do not dislike the former interpretation.

   Taking it in a general way, the meaning will be "Tongues, in so far as
   they are given for a sign -- that is, for a miracle -- are appointed
   not properly for believers, but for unbelievers." The advantages
   derived from tongues were various. They provided against necessity --
   that diversity of tongues might not prevent the Apostles from
   disseminating the gospel over the whole world: there was, consequently,
   no nation with which they could not hold fellowship. They served also
   to move or terrify unbelievers by the sight of a miracle -- for the
   design of this miracle, equally with others, was to prepare those who
   were as yet at a distance from Christ for rendering obedience to him.
   Believers, who had already devoted themselves to his doctrine, did not
   stand so much in need of such preparation. Hence, the Corinthians
   brought forward that gift improperly and out of its right place,
   allowing prophecy in the meantime to be neglected, which was peculiarly
   and specially set apart for believers, and ought, therefore, to be
   familiar to them, for in tongues they looked to nothing farther than
   the miracle.

   23. If therefore the whole Church come together As they did not see
   their fault, in consequence of having their minds pre-occupied with a
   foolish and depraved desire, he tells them that they will be exposed to
   the scorn of the wicked or the unlearned, if any, on coming into their
   assembly, should hear them uttering a sound, but not speaking. For what
   unlearned person will not reckon those to be out of their right mind,
   who, in place of speech, utter empty sound, and are taken up with that
   vanity, while they were gathered together for the purpose of hearing
   the doctrine of God? This statement has much that is cutting: "You
   applaud yourselves in your own sleeve; but the wicked and the unlearned
   laugh at your fooleries. You do not, therefore, see what to the
   unlearned and unbelieving is perfectly manifest."

   Here Chrysostom starts a question' "If tongues were given to
   unbelievers for a sign, why does the Apostle say now, that they will be
   derided by them?" He answers, that they are for a sign to fill them
   with astonishment -- not to instruct them, or to reform them. At the
   same time he adds, that it is owing to their wickedness, that they look
   upon the sign as madness. This explanation does not satisfy me; for
   however an unbeliever or unlearned person may be affected by a miracle,
   and may regard with reverence the gift of God, he does not cease on
   that account to deride and condemn an unseasonable abuse of the gift,
   [849] and think thus with himself: "What do these men mean, by wearying
   out themselves and others to no purpose? Of what avail is their
   speaking, if nothing is to be learned from it?" Paul's meaning,
   therefore, is -- that the Corinthians would be justly convicted of
   madness by the unbelieving and unlearned, however much they might
   please themselves. [850]

   24. But if all prophesy As he had previously showed them, how much more
   advantageous prophecy is to those that are of the household of faith
   (Galatians 6:10) than the gift of tongues, so he now shows that it
   would be useful also to those that are without. (1 Corinthians 5:13.)
   This is a most powerful consideration for showing the Corinthians their
   error. For what a base part it is to depreciate a gift that is most
   useful both within and without, and to be wholly taken up with another
   gift which is useless to those that are within the house; and, in
   addition to this, gives occasion of offense to those that are without.
   He sets before them this advantage of prophecy, that it summons the
   consciences of the wicked to the tribunal of God, and strikes them with
   a lively apprehension of divine judgment in such a manner, that he who
   before in utter regardlessness despised sound doctrine, is constrained
   to give glory to God.

   We shall find it, however, much easier to understand this passage, if
   we compare it with another that occurs in the Epistle to the Hebrews
   (Hebrews 4:12.)

   The Word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged
   sword; piercing to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the
   joints and marrow -- a discerner of the thoughts of the heart. [851]

   For in both passages, it is the same kind of efficacy of the Word of
   God that is spoken of: only in that other passage it is spoken of more
   fully and distinctly. So far as the passage before us is concerned, it
   is not difficult to understand now, what is meant by being convinced
   and judged. The consciences of men are in a torpid state, [852] and are
   not touched with any feeling of dissatisfaction on account of their
   sins, so long as they are enveloped in the darkness of ignorance. In
   short, unbelief is like a lethargy that takes away feeling. But the
   Word of God penetrates even to the farthest recesses of the mind, and
   by introducing, as it were, a light, dispels darkness, and drives away
   that deadly torpor. Thus, then, unbelievers are convinced, inasmuch as
   they are seriously affected and alarmed, on coming to know that they
   have to do with God; and, in like manner, they are judged in this
   respect, that whereas they were previously involved in darkness, and
   did not perceive their own wretchedness and baseness, they are now
   brought into the light of day, and are constrained to bear witness
   against themselves.

   When he says, that they are judged and convinced by all, you must
   understand him as meaning all that prophesy; for he had said a little
   before, If ye all prophesy, (1 Corinthians 14:24.) He has expressly
   made use of a general term, with the view of removing the dislike that
   they felt for prophecy. [853] The unbeliever, I say, is convinced --
   not as if the Prophet pronounced a judgment upon him either silently in
   the mind, or openly with the mouth, but because the conscience of the
   hearer apprehends from the doctrine his own judgment. He is judged,
   inasmuch as he descends into himself, and, after thorough examination,
   comes to know himself, while previously he was unmindful of himself. To
   the same purpose, too, is that saying of Christ:

   The Spirit, when he is come, will convince the world of sin,
   (John 16:8;)

   and this is what he immediately adds -- that the secrets of his heart
   are made manifest For he does not mean, in my opinion, that it becomes
   manifest to others what sort of person he is, but rather that his own
   conscience is aroused, so that he perceives his sins, which previously
   lay hid from his view.

   Here again Chrysostom asks, how it comes to pass that prophecy is so
   effectual for arousing unbelievers, while Paul had said a little before
   that it was not given to them. He answers, that it was not given to
   them as a useless sign, but for the purpose of instructing them. For my
   part, however, I think that it will be simpler, and therefore more
   suitable, to say that it was not given to unbelievers, who perish,
   whose hearts

   Satan has blinded, that they may not see the light which shines forth
   from it.
   (2 Corinthians 4:3, 4.)

   It will also suit better to connect this statement with the prophecy
   [854] of Isaiah (Isaiah 28:11,12,) because the Prophet speaks of
   unbelievers, among whom prophecy is of no profit or advantage.

   25. Falling down on his face, he will worship For it is only the
   knowledge of God that can bring down the pride of the flesh. To that,
   prophecy brings us. Hence, it is its proper effect and nature to bring
   down men from their loftiness, that they may, with prostrate homage,
   render worship to God. To many, however, prophecy also is of no benefit
   -- nay more, they are made worse by what they hear. Nor was it even
   Paul's intention to ascribe this effect to prophecy, as if it were
   always the result of it. He simply designed to show how much advantage
   is derived from it, and what is its office. It is therefore a singular
   commendation, that it extorts from unbelievers this confession -- that
   God is present with his people, and that his majesty shines forth in
   the midst of their assembly.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [843] Mimetice Our author has here evidently in his eye the Greek
   adverb,mimetikos -- imitatively See Plut. 2.18. B. -- Ed

   [844] "Or le Prophete signifie;" -- "Now the Prophet means."

   [845] "It is written in the law. In the law,' that is, in the
   Scripture, in opposition to the words of the Scribes; for that
   distinction was very usual in the schools. This we learn out of the
   law, and this from the words of the Scribes. The words of the law (that
   is, of the Scripture) have no need of confirmation, but the words of
   the Scribes have need of confirmation.' The former Prophets, and the
   latter, and the Hagiographa, are each styled by the name of the law."
   Lightfoot. -- Ed.

   [846] Henderson on Isaiah, when commenting on the passage here quoted
   by the Apostle, (Isaiah 28:9-11,) observes, that it "contains the
   taunting language of the drunken priests and judges of the Jews, who
   repel with scorn the idea that they should require the plain and
   reiterated lessons which Jehovah taught by his messengers. Such
   elementary instruction was fit" (in their view) "only for babes: it was
   an insult to their understanding to suppose that they stood in need of
   it. The language of verse 10" (precept pon, precept, etc.) "more
   resembles that of inebriated persons, than any used by persons in a
   state of sobriety. The words are obviously selected to suit the
   character of those supposed to employ them; and, by their monosyllabic
   and repetitious forms, admirably express the initiatory process of
   tuition which they indignantly despise. 13-24 The language they
   employed in caviling at the Prophetic warnings was all but barbarous:
   it consisted of barely intelligible sounds: they should, by way of
   condign punishment, hear the foreign, and to them apparently mocking
   accents of the Chaldeans, whom God would employ as the interpreters of
   his severe but righteous will. The passage is employed by Paul (1
   Corinthians 14:20, 21) quite in the spirit of the connection in which
   it here stands. He tacitly compares the Corinthian faction, which
   boasted of the faculty of speaking in unknown tongues, to the puerile
   characters adverted to, 1 Corinthians 14:9, (paidia, nepazete, etc.)
   and then reminds them, that speaking in such languages had been
   represented in the Jewish Scriptures -- en to nomo (in the law) as a
   punishment, or a mark of the Divine displeasure, and not as a matter of
   desire or envy." -- Ed

   [847] "En ignorance et bestise" -- "In ignorance and stupidity."

   [848] Calvin makes a similar observation when [33]commenting on
   Ephesians 4:14. "Nam postquam Christo nati sumus, debemus adolescere,
   ita ut non simus intelligentia pueri. Hine apparet, qualis sub Papatu
   sit Christianismus, ubi, quam diligentissime possunt, in hoc laborant
   pastores, ut plebem in prima infantia detineant;" -- "For after being
   born to Christ, we ought to grow, and not to be children in
   understanding. (1 Corinthians 14:20.) Hence it appears what sort of
   Christianity there is in connection with Popery, in which the pastors
   labor as strenuously as they can to keep the people in infancy." -- Ed.

   [849] "Le sot abus de ce don, quand on le met en auant sans raison et
   consideration;" -- "The foolish abuse of this gift, when they bring it
   forward without, reason and consideration."

   [850] "En ceste faqon de faire;" -- "In this manner of acting."

   [851] "Des pensees et intentions du coeur;" -- "Of the thoughts and
   intents of the heart."

   [852] "Elles sont comme endormies et stupides;" "They are, as it were,
   drowsy and stupid."

   [853] "Afin de monstrer qu'il ne se faut point lasser de la prophetic;"
   -- "In order to show that they ought not to entertain a feeling of
   dislike for prophecy."

   [854] The reader will observe that this is the prophecy to which the
   Apostle refers in 1 Corinthians 14:21. -- Ed.
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 14:26-33

   26. How is it then, brethren? when ye come together, every one of you
   hath a psalm, hath a doctrine, hath a tongue, hath a revelation, hath
   an interpretation. Let all things be done unto edifying.

   26. Quid igitur est, fratres? Quoties convenitis, unusquisque vestrum
   canticum habet, doctrinam habet, linguam habet, revelationem habet,
   interpretationem habet: omnia ad aedificationem fiant.

   27. If any man speak in an unknown tongue, let it be by two, or at the
   most by three, and that by course; and let one interpret.

   27. Sive lingua quis loquitur, fiat per duos, aut ad summum tres, idque
   vicissim, et unus interpretetur.

   28. But if there be no interpreter, let him keep silence in the church;
   and let him speak to himself, and to God.

   28. Quodsi non sit interpres, taceat in Ecclesia: caeterum sibi ipsi
   loquatur et Deo.

   29. Let the prophets speak two or three, and let the other judge.

   29. Prophetae autem duo aut tres loquantur, et caeteri diiudicent.

   30. If any thing be revealed to another that sitteth by, let the first
   hold his peace.

   30. Quodsi alii fuerit revelatum assidenti, prior taceat:

   31. For ye may all prophesy one by one, that all may learn, and all may
   be comforted.

   31. Potestis enim singulatim omnes prophetare, ut omnes discant, et
   omnes consolationem accipiant. [855]

   32. And the spirits of the prophets are subject to the prophets.

   32. Et spiritus prophetarum prophetis sunt subiecti:

   33. For God is not the author of confusion, but of peace, as in all
   churches of the saints.

   33. Non enim seditionis est Deus, sed pacis, quemadmodum in omnibus
   Ecclesiis sanctorum. [856]


   26. What is it then? He now shows the way in which they may remedy
   those evils. In the first place, each gift must have its place, but in
   order and in measure. Farther, the Church must not be taken up to no
   purpose with unprofitable exercises, but must, in whatever is done,
   have an eye to edification. He speaks, however, in the first place of
   edification in this way: "Let every one, according as he has been
   endowed with some particular gift, make it his aim to lay it out for
   the advantage of all." For it is in this way that we must understand
   the word rendered every one -- that no one may take it as implying
   universality, as though all to a man were endowed with some such gift.

   27. If any one speak in another tongue He now describes the order and
   limits the measure. "If you have a mind to speak with other tongues,
   let only two speak, or, at most, not more than three, and let there be
   at the same time an interpreter sitting by Without an interpreter,
   tongues are of no advantage: let them, therefore be dispensed with." It
   is to be observed, however, that he does not command, but merely
   permits; for the Church can, without any inconvenience, dispense with
   tongues, except in so far as they are helps to prophecy, as the Hebrew
   and Greek languages are at this day. Paul, however, makes this
   concession, that he may not seem to deprive the assembly of believers
   of any gift of the Spirit.

   At the same time, it might seem as if even this were not agreeable to
   reason, inasmuch as he said before, (1 Corinthians 14:22,) that
   tongues, in so far as they are for a sign, are suited to unbelievers. I
   answer, that, while a miracle may be performed more particularly with a
   view to unbelievers, it, nevertheless, does not follow, that it may not
   be of some advantage to believers also. If you understand, that an
   unknown tongue is a sign to unbelievers in the sense that Isaiah's
   words [857] bear, the method of procedure, which Paul here prescribes,
   is different. For he allows of other tongues in such a way that,
   interpretation being joined with them, nothing is left obscure. He
   observes, therefore, a most admirable medium in correcting the fault of
   the Corinthians. On the one hand, he does not at all set aside any gift
   of God whatever, [858] in order that all his benefits may be seen among
   believers. On the other hand he makes a limitation -- that ambition do
   not usurp the place that is due to the glory of God, and that no gift
   of inferior importance stand in the way of those that are of chief
   moment; and he adds the sauce [859] -- that there be no mere
   ostentation, devoid of advantage.

   28. Let him speak to himself and to God "Let him enjoy," says he, "his
   gift in his own conscience, and let him give thanks to God." For in
   this way I explain the expression to speak to himself and to God, as
   meaning -- to recognize in his own mind with thanksgiving the favor
   conferred upon him, [860] and to enjoy it as his own, when there is not
   an opportunity for bringing it forward in a public manner. For he draws
   a contrast between this secret way of speaking, and speaking publicly
   in the Church -- which he forbids. [861]

   29. Prophets, two or three. As to prophecy, too, he prescribes limits,
   because "multitude," as they commonly say, "breeds confusion." This is
   true, for we know it by every day's experience. He does not, however,
   restrict the number so definitely, as when he was treating of tongues,
   for there is less danger, in the event of their applying themselves for
   a longer time to prophesyings, nay more, continued application would be
   the most desirable thing of all; but Paul considered what the weakness
   of men could bear.

   There still remains, however, a question -- why it is that he assigns
   the like number to prophesyings and to tongues, except that, as to the
   latter, he adds particularly -- at the most, for if tongues are less
   useful, there ought assuredly to be a more sparing use of them? I
   answer, that even in tongues, as he takes the term, prophecy is
   included; for tongues were made use of either for discourses, [862] or
   for prayers. In the former department, the interpreter was in the place
   of the prophet: thus it was the principal and more frequent exercise of
   it. Only he limits the measure of it, lest it should fall into contempt
   through a feeling of disgust, and lest those who were less skillful
   should prevent those that were better qualified from having time and
   opportunity of speaking; for he would, undoubtedly, have those to whom
   he assigns the duty of speaking, to be of the more select class, and
   appointed by their common suffrages. [863] None, however, are more
   inclined to push themselves forward, than those who have but a slight
   smattering of learning, so that the proverb holds good, "Ignorance is
   pert." [864] Paul had it in view to remedy this evil, by assigning the
   office of speaking to two or three

   Let the others judge. Lest he should give any occasion to the others to
   complain -- as though he were desirous that the gift of God [865]
   should be suppressed among them and buried, he shows in what way they
   may lawfully make use of it for the benefit of the Church, even by
   keeping silence -- if they set themselves to judge of what is said by
   others. For it is of no small advantage, that there should be some that
   are skillful in judging, who will not allow sound doctrine to be
   perverted by the impostures of Satan, or to be otherwise corrupted by
   silly trifles. Paul, accordingly, teaches that the other prophets will
   be useful to the Church, even by keeping silence.

   It may seem, however, to be absurd that men should have liberty given
   them to judge of the doctrine of God, which ought to be placed beyond
   all controversy. I answer, that the doctrine of God is not subjected to
   the scrutiny of men, but there is simply permission given them to judge
   by the Spirit of God, whether it is his word that is set before them,
   or whether human inventions are, without any authority, set off under
   this pretext, as we shall have occasion to notice again ere long.

   30. But if anything be revealed to another. Here is another advantage
   -- that whenever there will be occasion, the way will also be open to
   them. [866] Hence they have no longer any occasion to complain, that
   the Spirit is bound, or that his mouth is shut. For all have
   opportunity and liberty allowed them of speaking, when there is
   occasion for it, provided only no one unseasonably intrudes -- having
   it in view to please himself, rather than to serve some useful purpose.
   Now he requires this modesty on the part of all -- that every one in
   his place shall give way to another that has something better to bring
   forward. [867] For this only is the true liberty of the Spirit -- not
   that every one be allowed to blab out rashly whatever he pleases, but
   that all, from the highest to the lowest, voluntarily allow themselves
   to be under control, and that the one Spirit be listened to, by
   whatever mouth he speaks. As to the certainty of the revelation, we
   shall see ere long.

   31. You can all, one by one. In the first place, when he says all, he
   does not include believers universally, but only those that were
   endowed with this gift. Farther, he does not mean that all ought to
   have equally their turn, but that, according as it might be for the
   advantage of the people, each one should come forward to speak either
   more frequently or more seldom. [868] "No one will remain always
   unemployed; but an opportunity of speaking will present itself,
   sometimes to one and at other times to another."

   He adds, that all may learn. This is applicable, it is true, to the
   whole of the people, but it is particularly suited to the Prophets, and
   Paul more especially refers to them. For no one will ever be a good
   teacher, who does not show himself to be teachable, as no one will ever
   be found who has, in himself alone, such an overflowing in respect of
   perfection of doctrine, as not to derive benefit from listening to
   others. Let all, therefore, undertake the office of teaching on this
   principle, that they do not refuse or grudge, to be scholars to each
   other in their turn, whenever there shall be afforded to others the
   means of edifying the Church.

   He says, in the second place, that all may receive consolation. Hence
   we may infer, that the ministers of Christ, so far from envying, should
   rather rejoice with all their heart, that they are not the only persons
   that excel, but have fellow-partakers of the same gift -- a disposition
   which Moses discovered, as is related in sacred history. (Numbers
   11:28.) For when his servant, inflamed with a foolish jealousy, was
   greatly displeased, because the gift of prophecy was conferred upon
   others also, he reproves him: "Nay," says he, "would that all the
   people of God were sharers with me in this superior gift!" And,
   undoubtedly, it is a special consolation for pious ministers, to see
   the Spirit of God, whose instruments they are, working in others also,
   and they derive also from this no small confirmation. It is a
   consolation, too, that it contributes to the spread of the word of God,
   the more it has of ministers and witnesses.

   As, however, the word parakaleisthai, which Paul here employs, is of
   doubtful signification, [869] it might also be rendered may receive
   exhortation. [870] Nor would this be unsuitable, for it is sometimes of
   advantage to listen to others, that we may be more powerfully stirred
   up to duty.

   32. And the spirits of the Prophets. This, too, is one of the reasons,
   why it is necessary for them to take turns -- because it will sometimes
   happen that, in the doctrine of one Prophet, the others may find
   something to reprove. "It is not reasonable," says he, "that any one
   should be beyond the sphere of scrutiny. In this way it will sometimes
   come to a person's turn to speak, who was among the audience and was
   sitting silent."

   This passage has been misunderstood by some, as if Paul had said, that
   the Lord's Prophets were not like persons taken with a sudden frenzy,
   who, when a divine impulse (enthousiasmos) had once seized them, [871]
   were no longer masters of themselves. [872] It is indeed true that
   God's Prophets are not disordered in mind; but this has nothing to do
   with this passage of Paul's writings. For it means, as I have already
   stated, that no one is exempted from the scrutiny of others, but that
   all must be listened to, with this understanding, that their doctrine
   is, nevertheless, to be subjected to examination. It is not, however,
   without difficulty, for the Apostle declares that their spirits are
   subject. Though it is of gifts that he speaks, how can prophecy, which
   is given by the Holy Spirit, be judged of by men, so that the Spirit
   himself is not judged by them? In this manner, even the word of God,
   which is revealed by the Spirit; will be subjected to examination. The
   unseemliness of this needs not be pointed out, for it is of itself
   abundantly evident. I maintain, however, that neither the Spirit of God
   nor his word is restrained by a scrutiny of this kind. The Holy Spirit,
   I say, retains his majesty unimpaired, so as to

   judge all things, while he is judged by no one.
   (1 Corinthians 2:15.)

   The sacred word of God, too, retains the respect due to it, so that it
   is received without any disputation, as soon as it is presented.

   "What is it, then," you will say, "that is subjected to examination?"'
   I answer -- If any one were furnished with a full revelation, that man
   would undoubtedly, along with his gift, be above all scrutiny. There
   is, I say, no subjection, where there is a plenitude of revelation; but
   as God has distributed his spirit to every one in a certain measure, in
   such a way that, even amidst the greatest abundance, there is always
   something wanting, it is not to be wondered, if no one is elevated to
   such a height, as to look down from aloft upon all others, and have no
   one to pass judgment upon him. We may now see how it is, that, without
   any dishonor to the Holy Spirit, his gifts admit of being examined. Nay
   more, where, after full examination, nothing is found that is worthy of
   reproof, there will still be something, that stands in need of
   polishing. The sum of all, therefore, is this -- that the gift is
   subjected to examination in such a way, that whatever is set forth, the
   Prophets consider as to it -- whether it has proceeded from the Spirit
   of God; for if it shall appear that the Spirit is the author of it,
   there is no room left for hesitation.

   It is, however still farther asked -- "What rule is to be made use of
   in examining?" This question is answered in part by the mouth of Paul,
   who, in Romans 12:6, requires that prophecy be regulated according to
   the proportion of faith. As to the passing of judgment, however, there
   is no doubt, that it ought to be regulated by the word and Spirit of
   God -- that nothing may be approved of, but what is discovered to be
   from God -- that nothing may be found fault with but in accordance with
   his word -- in fine, that God alone may preside in this judgment, and
   that men may be merely his heralds.

   From this passage of Paul's writings, we may conjecture how very
   illustrious that Church was, in respect of an extraordinary abundance
   and variety of spiritual gifts. There were colleges of Prophets, so
   that pains had to be taken, that they might have their respective
   turns. There was so great a diversity of gifts, that there was a
   superabundance. We now see our leanness, nay, our poverty; but in this
   we have a just punishment, sent to requite our ingratitude. For neither
   are the riches of God exhausted, nor is his benignity lessened; but we
   are neither deserving of his bounty, nor capable of receiving his
   liberality. Still we have an ample sufficiency of light and doctrine,
   provided there were no deficiency in respect of the cultivation of
   piety, and the fruits that spring from it.

   33. For God is not of confusion. [873] We must understand the word
   Author, or some term of that kind. [874] Here we have a most valuable
   statement, by which we are taught, that we do not serve God unless in
   the event of our being lovers of peace, and eager to promote it.
   Whenever, therefore, there is a disposition to quarrel, there, it is
   certain, God does not reign. And how easy it is to say this! How very
   generally all have it in their mouths! Yet, in the meantime, the most
   of persons fly into a rage about nothing, or they trouble the Church,
   from a desire that they may, by some means, rise into view, and may
   seem to be somewhat. (Galatians 2:6.)

   Let us, therefore, bear in mind, that, in judging as to the servants of
   Christ, this mark must be kept in view -- whether or not they aim at
   peace and concord, and, by conducting themselves peaceably, avoid
   contentions to the utmost of their power, provided, however, we
   understand by this a peace of which the truth of God is the bond. For
   if we are called to contend against wicked doctrines, even though
   heaven and earth should come together, we must, nevertheless, persevere
   in the contest. We must, indeed, in the first place, make it our aim,
   that the truth of God may, without contention, maintain its ground; but
   if the wicked resist, we must set our face against them, and have no
   fear, lest the blame of the disturbances should be laid to our charge.
   For accursed is that peace of which revolt from God is the bond, and
   blessed are those contentions by which it is necessary to maintain the
   kingdom of Christ.

   As in all the Churches. The comparison [875] does not refer merely to
   what was said immediately before, but to the whole of the foregoing
   representation. "I have hitherto enjoined upon you nothing that is not
   observed in all the Churches, and, in this manner, they are maintained
   in peace. Let it be your care, therefore, to borrow, what other
   Churches have found by experience to be salutary, and most profitable
   for maintaining peace." His explicit mention of the term saints is
   emphatic -- as if with the view of exempting rightly constituted
   Churches from a mark of disgrace. [876]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [855] "Que tous soyent consolez, ou, exhortez;" -- "That all may be
   comforted, or, exhorted."

   [856] "Comme en toutes les Eglises des satnets, ou, comme on voit en
   toutes;" -- "As in all the Churches of the saints, or, as one sees in
   all."

   [857] The words referred to are those which Paul had quoted above in 1
   Corinthians 14:21. -- Ed.

   [858] "Tant petit soit-il;" -- "Be it ever so small."

   [859] "Ascauoir l'interpretation;" -- "Namely, the interpretation."

   [860] "Le benefice et don de Dieu;" -- "The kindness and gift of God."

   [861] "En ce cas;" -- "In this case."

   [862] "Pour traiter de quelques matieres de la religion;" -- "For
   treating of some matters of religion."

   [863] "Par l'approbation commune de l'Eglise;" -- "By the common
   approbation of the Church."

   [864] The Latins have a similar proverb -- "Stater in lagena bis bis
   clamat;" -- "A penny in an earthen pot is constantly tinkling." The
   Germans say -- "The higher the head, the humbler the heart." -- Ed.

   [865] "Le don de Dieu qu'ils ont receu;" -- "The gift of God which they
   have received."

   [866] "Que toutes fois et quantes qu'il sera besoin, eux aussi auront
   lieu de parler;" -- "That as often, and in as far as there will be
   occasion, they will also have opportunity of speaking."

   [867] "But if anything be revealed to another that sitteth by That is
   very frequently said of the Jewish doctors, hyh yvsk He sat -- which
   means not barely he was sitting, but he taught out of the seat of the
   teacher, or he sat teaching, or ready to teach So that, indeed, he sat
   and he taught are all one. Examples among the Talmudists are infinite.
   In the same sense the Apostle: If something be revealed to some
   minister, who hath a seat among those that teach, etc., not revealed in
   that very instant: but if he saith that he hath received some
   revelation from God, then ho protos sigato -- let the first be silent:,
   let him be silent who psalmon echei -- hath a psalm -- and give way to
   him.'" Lightfoot. -- Ed

   [868] "Ainsi qu'il sera auise pour le mieux;" -- "As it shall be judged
   for the better."

   [869] "Ha double signification;" -- "Has a double signification."

   [870] Thus in Acts 15:32, parekalesan means exhorted, while the noun
   paraklesis is used in the immediately preceding verse in the sense of
   consolation. -- Ed

   [871] "Depuis que leur folie les prenoit, laquelle ils appeloyent vn
   mouuement Diuin;" -- "Whenever their folly seized them, which they
   called a Divine impulse."

   [872] The reference here is manifestly to those who practiced
   divination, (Theomanteia) of whom there were three sorts among the
   Grecians, distinguished by three distinct ways of receiving the divine
   afflatus, (enthousiasmos.) See Potter's Grecian Antiquities, volume 1,
   pp. 349-354. Virgil describes in the following terms the frantic state
   of the Sibyl, when pretending to be under divine impulse: -- "Non
   comtaee mansere comae; sed pectus anhelum, ^
   Et rabie fera corda tument: majorque videri, ^
   Nee mortale sonans, attlata est numine quando ^
   Jam propiore dei." "But when the headstrong god, not yet appeased,
   With holy frenzy had the Sibyl seized, ^
   Terror froze up her grisly hair; her breast ^
   Throbbing with holy fury, still expressed ^
   A greater horror, and she bigger seems, ^
   Swoln with the afflatus, whilst in holy screams ^
   She unfolds the hidden mysteries of fate." Virg. Aen.VI. 48-51. -- Ed.

   [873] "Car Dieu n'est point Dieu de confusion;" -- "For God is not a
   God of confusion."

   [874] Granville Penn reads the verse as follows: For they are not
   spirits of disorder, but of peace He thinks it probable, that "the
   singular, esti, has caused a vitiation of this passage, by suggesting
   the introduction of a singular nominative to agree with it, namely ho
   Theos, God;' whereas in the reading of Tertullian, as early as the
   second or third century, esti referred to the neuter plural, pneumata:
   Et spiritus prophetarum prophetis subditi sunt -- non enim eversionis
   sunt, sed pacis.' (And the spirits of the Prophets are subject to the
   Prophets -- for they are not of disorder but of peace.) The Greek,
   therefore, stood thus: ou gar estin akatastasias (pneumata), all
   eirenes. This early external testimony, combined with the internal
   testimony of the context, is sufficient evidence, that Theos has been
   unskilfully inserted by philoponists here, as Theos, Kurios, Christos,
   have been intruded into many other passages of the Sacred Text." -- Ed

   [875] "Ce mot, Comme;" -- "This word, As."

   [876] "Comme s'il vouloit dire qu'il n'y auroit point de propos d'auoir
   quelque souspecon sur les Eglises bien reformees;" -- "As if he meant
   to say, that there was no occasion for having any suspicion as to
   Churches thoroughly reformed."
     __________________________________________________________________

   1 Corinthians 14:34-40

   34. Let your women keep silence in the churches: for it is not
   permitted unto them to speak; but they are commanded to be under
   obedience, as also saith the law.

   34. Mulieres vestrae in Ecclesiis taceant; non enim permissum est ipsis
   loqui, sed subiectae sint, quemadmodum et Lex dicit.

   35. And if they will learn anything, let them ask their husbands at
   home: for it is a shame for women to speak in the church.

   35. Si quid autem velint discere, domi maritos suos interrogent: turpe
   enim est mulieribus in Ecclesia loqui.

   36. What? came the word of God out from you? or came it unto you only?

   36. An a vobis sermo Dei profectus est, aut ad vos solos pervenit?

   37. If any man think himself to be a prophet, or spiritual, let him
   acknowledge that the things that I write unto you are the commandments
   of the Lord.

   37. Si quis videtur sibi propheta esse aut spiritualis, agnoscat, quae
   scribo vobis, Domini esse mandata.

   38. But if any man be ignorant, let him be ignorant.

   38. Si quis autem ignorat, ignoret.

   39. Wherefore, brethren, covet to prophesy, and forbid not to speak
   with tongues.

   39. Itaque, fratres, aemulamini prophetiam, et linguis loqui ne
   prohibeatis.

   40. Let all things be done decently and in order.

   40. Porro onmia decenter et ordine fiant.


   It appears that the Church of the Corinthians was infected with this
   fault too, that the talkativeness of women was allowed a place in the
   sacred assembly, or rather that the fullest liberty was given to it.
   Hence he forbids them to speak in public, either for the purpose of
   teaching or of prophesying. This, however, we must understand as
   referring to ordinary service, or where there is a Church in a
   regularly constituted state; for a necessity may occur of such a nature
   as to require that a woman should speak in public; but Paul has merely
   in view what is becoming in a duly regulated assembly.

   34. Let them be in subjection, as also saith the law. What connection
   has the object that he has in view with the subjection under which the
   law places women? "For what is there," some one will say, "to hinder
   their being in subjection, and yet at the same time teaching?" I
   answer, that the office of teaching [877] is a superiority in the
   Church, and is, consequently, inconsistent with subjection. For how
   unseemly a thing it were, that one who is under subjection to one of
   the members, should preside [878] over the entire body! It is therefore
   an argument from things inconsistent -- If the woman is under
   subjection, she is, consequently, prohibited from authority to teach in
   public. [879] And unquestionably, [880] wherever even natural propriety
   has been maintained, women have in all ages been excluded from the
   public management of affairs. It is the dictate of common sense, that
   female government is improper and unseemly. Nay more, while originally
   they had permission given to them at Rome to plead before a court,
   [881] the effrontery of Caia Afrania [882] led to their being
   interdicted, even from this. Paul's reasoning, however, is simple --
   that authority to teach is not suitable to the station that a woman
   occupies, because, if she teaches, she presides over all the men, while
   it becomes her to be under subjection.

   35. If they wish to learn any thing. That he may not seem, by this
   means, to shut out women from opportunities of learning, he desires
   them, if they are in doubt as to anything, to inquire in private, that
   they may not stir up any disputation in public. When he says, husbands,
   he does not prohibit them from consulting the Prophets themselves, if
   necessary. For all husbands are not competent to give an answer in such
   a case; but, as he is reasoning here as to external polity, he reckons
   it sufficient to point out what is unseemly, that the Corinthians may
   guard against it. In the meantime, it is the part of the prudent reader
   to consider, that the things of which he here treats are intermediate
   and indifferent, in which there is nothing unlawful, but what is at
   variance with propriety and edification.

   36 Did the word of God come out from you? This is a somewhat sharper
   reproof, but nothing more than was needful for beating down the
   haughtiness of the Corinthians. They were, beyond measure,
   self-complacent. They could not endure that either themselves, or what
   belonged to them, should be found fault with in anything. He asks,
   accordingly, whether they are the only Christians in the world; nay,
   farther, whether they are the first, or are to be the last? "Did the
   word of God," says he, "come out from you?" that is, "Did it originate
   with you?" "Has it ended with you?" that is, "Will it spread no
   farther?" The design of the admonition is this -- that they may not,
   without having any regard to others, please themselves in their own
   contrivances or customs. And this is a doctrine of general application;
   for no Church should be taken up with itself exclusively, to the
   neglect of others; but on the contrary, they ought all, in their turn,
   to hold out the right hand to each other, in the way of cherishing
   mutual fellowship, and accommodating themselves to each other, in so
   far as a regard to harmony requires. [883]

   But here it is asked, whether every Church, according as it has had the
   precedence of another in the order of time, [884] has it also in its
   power to bind it to observe its institutions. [885] For Paul seems to
   intimate this in what he says. For example, Jerusalem was the mother of
   all the Churches, inasmuch as the word of the Lord had come out from it
   Was she then at liberty to assume to herself a superior right, so as to
   bind all others to follow her? I answer, that Paul here does not employ
   an argument of universal application, but one that was specially
   applicable to the Corinthians, as is frequently the case. He had,
   therefore, an eye to individuals, rather than to the thing itself.
   Hence it does not necessarily follow, that Churches that are of later
   origin must be bound to observe, in every point, the institutions of
   the earlier ones, inasmuch as even Paul himself did not bind himself by
   this rule, so as to obtrude upon other Churches the customs that were
   in use at Jerusalem. Let there be nothing of ambition -- let there be
   nothing of obstinacy -- let there be nothing of pride and contempt for
   other Churches -- let there be, on the other hand, a desire to edify --
   let there be moderation and prudence; and in that case, amidst a
   diversity of observances, there will be nothing that is worthy of
   reproof.

   Let us, therefore, bear in mind, that the haughtiness of the
   Corinthians is here reproved, who, concerned for themselves
   exclusively, [886] showed no respect to the Churches of earlier origin,
   from which they had received the gospel, and did not endeavor to
   accommodate themselves to other Churches, to which the gospel had
   flowed out from them. Would to God that there were no Corinth in our
   times, in respect of this fault, as well as of others! But we see how
   savage men, who have never tasted the gospel, (Hebrews 6:5,) trouble
   the Churches of the saints by a tyrannical enforcement of their own
   laws. [887]

   37. If any one thinks himself. Mark here the judgment, which he had
   previously assigned to the Prophets -- that they should receive what
   they recognised as being from God. He does not, however, desire them to
   inquire as to his doctrine, as though it were a doubtful matter, but to
   receive it as the sure word of God, inasmuch as they will recognize it
   as the word of God, if they judge rightly. Farther, it is in virtue of
   apostolical authority, that he takes it upon himself to prescribe to
   them the sentence which they ought to pronounce. [888]

   There is still greater confidence in what he immediately adds -- He
   that is ignorant, let him be ignorant. This, it is true, was allowable
   for Paul, who was fully assured as to the revelation that he had
   received from God, and he ought also to have been well known to the
   Corinthians, so that they should have looked upon him in no other
   light, than as an Apostle of the Lord. It is not, however, for every
   one to advance such a claim for himself, or if he does, he will, by his
   boasting, throw himself open to merited derision, for then only is
   there ground for such confidence, when what is affirmed with the mouth
   shows itself in reality. It was with truth that Paul affirmed, that his
   precepts were those of the Lord. Many will be prepared to pretend the
   same thing on false grounds. His great object is this -- that it may be
   clearly perceived, that he who does not allow himself to be under
   control, speaks as from the Holy Spirit, not from his own brain. That
   man, therefore, who is no other than a pure organ of the Holy Spirit,
   will have the courage to declare fearlessly with Paul, that those who
   shall reject his doctrine, are not Prophets or spiritual persons; and
   this he will do in virtue of a right that belongs to him, in accordance
   with what we had in the beginning of the Epistle -- he that is
   spiritual, judgeth all things. (1 Corinthians 2:15.)

   But it may be asked here, how it is that Paul declares those things to
   be commandments of the Lord, as to which no statement is to be found in
   the Scriptures? Besides this, there is also another difficulty that
   presents itself -- that if they are the commandments of the Lord, they
   are necessary to be observed, and they bind the conscience, and yet
   they are rites connected with polity, as to the observance of which no
   such necessity exists. Paul, however, merely says, that he enjoins
   nothing, but what is in accordance with the will of God. Now God
   endowed him with wisdom, that he might recommend this order in external
   things at Corinth, and in other places -- not that it might be an
   inviolable law, like those that relate to the spiritual worship of God,
   but that it might be a useful directory to all the sons of God, and not
   by any means to be despised.

   38. But if any man be ignorant The old translation reads thus: He that
   knows not this, will be unknown; [889] but this is a mistake. For Paul
   had it in view to cut off every handle from contentious persons, who
   make no end of disputing, and that, under the pretense of inquiring --
   as if the matter were not yet clear; or at least he intimates in
   general terms, that he regarded as of no account any one that would
   call in question what he said. "If any one is ignorant, I do not stop
   to take notice of his doubts, for the certainty of my doctrine is not
   at all impaired thereby. Let him go then, whoever he may be. As for
   you, do not the less on that account give credit to Christ, as speaking
   by me." In fine, he intimates, that sceptics, contentious persons, and
   subtle disputants; [890] do not by the questions they raise diminish,
   in any degree, the authority of sound doctrine, and of that truth as to
   which believers ought to feel assured, and at the same time he
   admonishes us, not to allow their doubts to be any hindrance in our
   way. That elevation of mind, however, which despises all human
   judgments, ought to be founded on ascertained truth. Hence, as it would
   be the part of perverse rashness, either to maintain pertinaciously, in
   opposition to the views of all others, an opinion that has once been
   taken up, or audaciously to cling to it, while others are in doubt, so,
   on the other hand, when we have felt assured that it is God that
   speaks, let us fearlessly break through all human impediments and all
   difficulties. [891]

   39. Wherefore, brethren This is the conclusion in connection with the
   principal question -- that prophecy is to be preferred to other gifts,
   because it is the most useful gift of all, while at the same time other
   gifts ought not to be despised. We must observe, however, his manner of
   speaking. For he intimates, that prophecy is worthy of being eagerly
   and ardently aspired at by all. In the meantime, he exhorts them not to
   envy others the rarer gift, [892] which is not so much to be desired;
   nay more, to allow them the praise that is due to them, divesting
   themselves of all envy.

   40. All things decently and in order Here we have a more general
   conclusion, which does not merely include, in short compass, the entire
   case, but also the different parts. Nay farther, it is a rule by which
   we must regulate [893] everything, that has to do with external polity.
   As he had discoursed, in various instances, as to rites, he wished to
   sum up everything here in a brief summary -- that decorum should be
   observed -- that confusion should be avoided. This statement shows,
   that he did not wish to bind consciences by the foregoing precepts, as
   if they were in themselves necessary, but only in so far as they were
   subservient to propriety and peace. Hence we gather (as I have said) a
   doctrine that is always in force, as to the purpose to which the polity
   of the Church ought to be directed. The Lord has left external rites in
   our choice with this view -- that we may not think that his worship
   consists wholly in these things.

   In the meantime, he has not allowed us a rambling and unbridled
   liberty, but has inclosed it (so to speak) with railings, [894] or at
   least has laid a restriction upon the liberty granted by him in such a
   manner, that it is after all only from his word that we can judge as to
   what is right. This passage, therefore, when duly considered, will show
   the difference between the tyrannical edicts of the Pope, which oppress
   men's consciences with a dreadful bondage, and the godly regulations of
   the Church, by which discipline and order are maintained. Nay farther,
   we may readily infer from this, that the latter are not to be looked
   upon as human traditions, inasmuch as they are founded upon this
   general injunction, and have a manifest approval, as it were, from the
   mouth of Christ himself.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [877] "D'enseigner ou de prescher;" -- "Of teaching or of preaching."

   [878] "Eust preeminence et authorite;" -- "Should have pre-eminence and
   authority."

   [879] "Elle ne pent donc auoir authorire publique de prescher ou
   enseigner;" -- "She cannot, therefore, have public authority to preach
   or teach."

   [880] "Entre toutes les nations et peuples;" -- "Among all nations and
   peoples."

   [881] "On les souffroit proposer deuant les iuges, et plaider
   publiquement;" -- "They were allowed to make an appearance before the
   judges, and plead publicly."'

   [882] Caia, Afrania was the wife of a senator, Licinius Buccio. The
   circumstance referred to by Calvin is related by Valerius Maximus,
   (lib. 8. c. 3. n. 2,) in the following terms: -- "Mulicbris verecundiae
   oblita, suas per se causas agebat, et importunis clamoribus judicibus
   obstrepebat; non quod advocati ei deessent, sed quia impudentia
   abundabat. Hinc factum est. ut mulieres perfrictae frontis et
   matronalis pudoris oblitae, Afraniae per contumeliam dicerentur;" --
   "Forgetful of the modesty that becomes a femme, she pleaded her own
   cause in person, and annoyed the judges with a senseless clamouring --
   not from any want of advocates to take her case in hand, but from
   excessive impudence. In consequence of this, women that were of bold
   front, and were forgetful of the modesty that becomes a matron, were,
   by way of reproach, called Afranias." -- Ed.

   [883] "Autant qu'il est requis pour nourrir paix et concorde;" -- "in
   so far as it is requisite for maintaining peace and harmony."

   [884] "Et est plus ancienne;" -- "And is more ancient."

   [885] "A ses ordonnances et manieres de faire;" -- "To its ordinances
   and methods of acting."

   [886] "Ne regardans qu'a eux mesmes, et se plaisans en leur facons de
   faire;" -- "Looking only to themselves, and pleasing themselves in
   their modes of acting."

   [887] "En voulant d'vne faqon tyrannique contraindre tout le monde a
   receuoir leurs loix;" -- "By endeavoring, in a tyrannical way, to
   constrain every one to receive their laws."

   [888] "En cest endroit;" -- "In this case."

   [889] Beausobre, when adverting to this reading, says: "La Vulgate
   porte, il sera ignore, Dieu k meconnoitra; ce qui vent dire, le punira
   Ce sens est fort bon;" -- "The Vulgate renders it: he will be unknown
   -- God will disown him -- meaning to say: He will punish him This is a
   very good meaning." In one Greek MS. the reading is agnoeitai, -- is
   unknown Wiclif, (1380) renders it -- And if ony man unknowith: he schal
   be unknown The view taken by Calvin, however, is the more generally
   approved, and seems to accord better with the general strain of the
   passage. -- Ed

   [890] "Les sophistes qui ne font iamais que disputer, sans rien
   resoudre ou accorder, ne les contentieux, et subtils iaseurs;" --
   "Sophists who are never but disputing, without coming to any solution
   or agreement, nor contentious persons, and subtile prattlers."

   [891] "Sans nous en soucier aucunement;" -- "Without giving ourselves
   any concern as to them."

   [892] "Autres, qui ont le don des langues, qui est vn don plus rare;"
   -- "Others, who have the gift of tongues, which is a rarer gift."

   [893] "This precept is sometimes applied to support the use of rites
   and ceremonies in the worship of God, not commanded in Scripture. But
   any one who considers the place which it holds in this discourse, will
   be sensible that it hath no relation to rites and ceremonies, but to
   the decent and orderly exercise of the spiritual gifts. Yet by parity
   of reasoning, it may be extended even to the rites of worship, provided
   they are left free to be used by every one as he sees them expedient."
   -- McKnight. "To adduce this text, as a direct argument about any
   particular external ceremonies used in divine worship, (which always
   appear decent and orderly to those who invent, impose, or are attached
   to them, and the contrary to those who dissent from them,) is doubtless
   wresting it from its proper meaning." Scott. -- Ed.

   [894] Cancellos (ut ita loquar) circumdedit. Calvin has here very
   probably in his eye an expression made use of by Cicero, "Si extra hos
   cancellos egredi conabor, quos mihi circumdedi;" -- "If I shall attempt
   to go beyond those limits, which I have marked out for myself." --
   (Cic. Quint. 10.) -- Ed.
     __________________________________________________________________
   
